EmbodiedGen: Towards a Generative 3D World Engine
for Embodied Intelligence

arXiv:2506.10600v2 [cs.RO] 16 Jun 2025

Xinjie Wang1 Liu Liu1 Yu Cao2 Ruiqi Wu5,1 Wenkang Qin2
Dehui Wang4,3 Wei Sui3 Zhizhong Su1
1
Horizon Robotics 2 GigaAI 3 D-Robotics
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 VCIP, CS, Nankai University
Alarm clock

Robot holds
a sign

Electric drill

Ceramic vase

……

Object & Texture Generation
Articulated Object Generation

3D Scene Generation
A modern kitchen
A living room with a
ceiling fan and curtains with warm lighting

Figure 1. EmbodiedGen, a toolkit for embodied intelligence interactive 3D world generation. EmbodiedGen enables controllable generation of rigid and articulated assets with accurate real-world scale and physical properties, along with stylistically diverse background
generation and visually rich texture generation and editing. These assets can be seamlessly integrated into various simulators such as
OpenAI Gym[4], Isaac Lab[26], MuJoCo[42] and SAPIEN[49]. These capabilities form a foundation for digital twinning, large-scale data
augmentation and embodied intelligence tasks such as manipulation and navigation across a wide range of simulation environments.

1

Abstract

based generative models [16, 29, 37, 47] and 3D asset generation [5, 11, 12, 23, 31, 57] have sparked growing interest in bridging this gap. However, existing 3D generation
toolkit often fall short for robotics applications, as conventional graphics assets typically lack physical realism, watertight geometry and accurate scale, leading to unreliable collision modeling and unrealistic interactions in simulators.
We introduce EmbodiedGen, a toolkit for interactive 3D
world generation, enables low-cost, high-quality, and highly
controllable asset generation in URDF, complete with watertight geometry and physically plausible properties. Our
main contributions are:
1. Toolkit for interactive 3D world generation. EmbodiedGen is the first comprehensive toolkit for generating
interactive 3D worlds to the needs of embodied intelligence related research. It supports real-to-sim digital
twin creation and enables the controllable generation of
diverse 3D assets, which can be seamlessly imported into
simulators.
2. Physically accurate, simulator-ready assets with high
fidelity. EmbodiedGen generates assets that not only
achieve state-of-the-art visual quality but are also physically plausible and ready for direct use in simulation environments. Each asset is enriched with physical properties, inspection metadata, textual descriptions, watertight
geometry and dual representations in both 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) and mesh formats.
3. Accessible and open-source. We release easy-to-use,
open-sourced pipelines and services to facilitate community development and research in embodied intelligence.

Constructing a physically realistic and accurately scaled
simulated 3D world is crucial for the training and evaluation of embodied intelligence tasks. The diversity, realism,
low cost accessibility and affordability of 3D data assets
are critical for achieving generalization and scalability in
embodied AI. However, most current embodied intelligence
tasks still rely heavily on traditional 3D computer graphics
assets manually created and annotated, which suffer from
high production costs and limited realism. These limitations significantly hinder the scalability of data driven approaches. We present EmbodiedGen, a foundational platform for interactive 3D world generation. It enables the
scalable generation of high-quality, controllable and photorealistic 3D assets with accurate physical properties and
real-world scale in the Unified Robotics Description Format
(URDF) at low cost. These assets can be directly imported
into various physics simulation engines for fine-grained
physical control, supporting downstream tasks in training and evaluation. EmbodiedGen is an easy-to-use, fullfeatured toolkit composed of six key modules: Image-to-3D,
Text-to-3D, Texture Generation, Articulated Object Generation, Scene Generation and Layout Generation. EmbodiedGen generates diverse and interactive 3D worlds composed
of generative 3D assets, leveraging generative AI to address
the challenges of generalization and evaluation to the needs
of embodied intelligence related research. EmbodiedGen1
are publicly available to foster future research.

2. Related Work

1. Introduction

3D Asset Generation The goal of 3D object generation
is to produce a corresponding 3D representation from an
input image or a textual description. Existing approaches
to this task can be broadly categorized into three representative paradigms: feedforward generation, optimizationbased generation, and view reconstruction. Feedforward
generation leverages large models to produce a 3D representation of the input prompt in a single forward pass. This
category includes methods such as LRM[11], PixelSplat[5],
GRM[52], and MVSplat[6], which are notable for their
inference time efficiency. Optimization-based generation, as exemplified by methods like DreamFusion[30] and
DreamMat[58], directly optimizes the parameters of the
3D representation using score distillation sampling (SDS)
guided by diffusion models and differentiable rendering.
This often results in higher-quality outputs at the cost of
increased computation time. View reconstruction methods
generate multi-view 2D images and reconstruct the final
3D representation via sparse-view geometry. Representative works in this line include Zero123[22], Unique3d[46],
MVDream[39], and MV-Adapter[17]. Driven by the

Despite the remarkable success of foundation models such
as CLIP [35] and GPT [1, 34], which leverage largescale internet data, extending this paradigm to the needs
of embodied intelligence related research presents significant challenges. Data collection for embodied AI tasks
is substantially more expensive and constrained, often requiring real world interaction, involving complex physical dynamics, making each data point several orders of
magnitude more costly. Moreover, robotic data is often context-specific and non-transferable across tasks or
embodiments, severely limiting reusability and scalability. Achieving general-purpose embodied intelligence in
the physical world requires techniques such as digital twins,
simulation-based augmentation, and reinforcement learning
in physically realistic environments. These goals demand
access to large-scale, diverse, and high-quality 3D asset libraries, as well as efficient pipelines for rapidly constructing
interactive 3D environments. Recent advances in diffusion
1 https : / / horizonrobotics . github . io / robot _ lab /
embodied_gen/index.html

2

User Input
Real World Image

Scene Designer

Assets Generator

Identify all interactable
objects and background.

Object & Texture Generation
Img-to-3D Object
Generation (Sec. 3.1)

Laptop
Water bottle
Rectangular box
Headphones
Smart phone
Power bank
Canned Coke
Phone holder

Task Description
Task1: PiPER robotic arm
picks shoes
Task2: FRANKA robotic arm
places a banana
Task3: PiPER robotic arm
opens a drawer to put fruit in

Scene Composer
Digital Twins

Text-to-3D Object
Generation (Sec. 3.2)
Interactive Scenes
Texture Generation
(Sec. 3.4)

Setup the scene composition
and layout for the task.
Articulated Object
Generation (Sec. 3.3)

Task: Dual-arm grasping
Robot: PiPER robotic arm
Background: Bedroom
Context: Table
Objects: {
manipulated: Shoes, …
distractors: …
}

3D Scene Generation
(Sec. 3.5)

Figure 2. The framework of EmbodiedGen. It enables the creation of a digital twin within a simulation environment from a single image.
Alternatively, given a task description, EmbodiedGen autonomously generates the scene layout, synthesizes detailed 3D object assets, and
arranges them in semantically and physically plausible configurations. This facilitates the effortless construction of an interactive 3D world,
supporting a wide range of embodied intelligence related research in diverse virtual environments.

Embodied Intelligence Tasks Prior works such as
RoboTwin[28], Gen2Sim[18], MatchMaker[45] and
ACDC[9] have explored using 3D generation techniques
to augment asset libraries within simulators. However,
due to limitations in the quality and efficiency of 3D
generation, the diversity of assets remains limited, and the
environments are often restricted to simplistic backgrounds,
which are insufficient for large-scale data generation and
evaluation in embodied intelligence tasks. To address these
challenges, we propose EmbodiedGen, a data-centric foundation for embodied AI, enables the generation of diverse
object and background assets from either images or text
prompts, and supports texture editing for enhanced visual
richness. This framework effectively supports real-to-sim
transfer, data augmentation, and physics-based simulation
in different simulators[4, 26, 42, 49], accelerating the
development of embodied intelligence systems.

demand for higher-quality 3D objects, recent methods
such as CLAY[56], Hunyuan3D[41], Meta3DGen[3], and
Trellis[50] have adopted a decoupled pipeline separating
geometry and texture generation into two stages, followed
by texture reprojection to fuse geometry with realistic textures. Beyond rigid object generation, methods such as
URDFormer[7] and SINGAPO[21] have been proposed to
generate articulated objects. However, these methods are
primarily limited to graphics-centric object generation. The
resulting objects lack real-world scale and physical properties, and there is no guarantee of watertightness or geometric integrity. These limitations significantly hinder their
direct applicability in physics-based simulators.

3D
Scene
Generation Recent
methods
like
LucidDreamer[8] adopt 3DGS[19] for flexible and
consistent scene rendering, but are mainly limited to
forward facing views. To enable full 360° scene generation,
panoramic representations have been explored. PERF[43]
pioneered panoramic NeRFs for novel view synthesis from
a single panorama. DreamScene360[60], HoloDreamer[59]
and WorldGen[51] extended this with panoramic Gaussian
splatting, while LayerPano3D[53] introduced layered
panoramas that are lifted into 3D splatting for handling
complex scenes. However, these methods are limited to
generating static 3D scenes without interactivity, making them unsuitable for the requirements of embodied
intelligence related research.

3. Generative 3D World Engine
We present EmbodiedGen, a novel framework for generating interactive 3D worlds to the needs of embodied intelligence related research. Leveraging generative AI, our
approach enables the creation of diverse, customizable environments that support the development and evaluation of
embodied agents (see Figure 2).
In this section, we first present the 3D object generation
modules, including Image-to-3D, which generates physically realistic 3D object assets from a single image to facilitate digital twin creation (Sec.3.1), and Text-to-3D, which
3

Input

Raw Image

Image-to-3D

Mesh & 3DGS repr.

Quality Inspection
success
fail
Aesthetic score: 4.62
Segmentation: Pass
Geometric Rationality: No
Conclusion:
The object lacks feet or a
stable base, making it
unable to stand stably on
the ground.

Physics Restoration
Real height: 1.2m
Mass: 60kg
Friction coefficient: 0.8
Category: humanoid
robot
Text description:
bipedal robot with
articulated limbs and
sleek design
Version: v1.0.0

Data Storage

URDF
Convertor

3D Assets
URDF

Figure 3. Overview of EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D Pipeline. From a single image, the system generates mesh and 3DGS assets, conducts
automatic quality inspectioin (aesthetics, segmentation, geometry), and re-generate failed outputs by auto-adjusted settings. A physics
expert module restores real-world scale and physical semantics, and the assets are saved in URDF format.

generates 3D objects from text descriptions for low cost,
high-quality data augmentation (Sec.3.2). We then introduce Articulated Object Generation (Sec.3.3), which produces manipulable articulated 3D assets from either dualstate image pairs or text descriptions. Texture Generation
is described in Sec.3.4, enabling highly controllable and
multi-style texture editing for 3D assets. Finally, we present
Scene Generation (Sec. 3.5), which generates diverse background environments and supports the composition of interactive 3D scenes.

textures; (3) developing a diffusion-based model for articulated 3D object generation to meet the growing demand for
complex data assets in diverse simulation tasks.
Physically Realistic 3D Asset Generation As illustrated
in Figure 3, we leverage Trellis[50] to generate 3D representations of input images. We further employ GPT-4o[1]
and Qwen[10] to build a physics expert agent. Specifically,
the agent estimates the real-world height of the asset by
rendering a frontal view of the generated object and applying text prompt constraints. Given that width, length, and
height are interdependent, scaling the height enables accurate recovery of the mesh and 3DGS’s true dimensions. For
assets with inherent ambiguity in size, a text-guided physical property restoration interface is available, allowing users
to specify context (e.g., “a tiger plush toy” or “a tiger animal”) for more accurate size prediction. Given four orthographic views of a rendered 3D asset as input, the physics
expert agent can further estimate physical properties such
as friction coefficient and mass, associate them with semantic descriptions, and categorize the object 3D assets accordingly.

3.1. Image-to-3D Object Generation
Method Overview The capabilities of community-driven
3D object asset generation are rapidly advancing and are
expected to continue improving. To fully leverage this
progress, we focus on building an image-to-3D system to
the needs of embodied intelligence related research. For the
model component, we leverage open-source models. This
approach ensures that our image-to-3D capabilities can be
easily extended as community models improve. Specifically, we use Trellis[50] due to its superior geometric generation quality and its ability to produce consistent 3D representations in both mesh and 3DGS[19] formats. However, Trellis has several limitations that hinder its direct use
in embodied AI tasks: the generated textures exhibit poor
visual quality, particularly due to excessive highlights that
result in noticeable whitening when baked onto the mesh.
Additionally, the resulting files are purely graphical assets
without real-world scale, physical properties, or physically
plausible geometry, making them unsuitable for direct use
in physics simulators[26, 42, 49]. We focus on three key
improvements: (1) developing a complete data twinning
pipeline for embodied intelligence asset generation, capable
of producing data assets with realistic properties, accurate
scale, and physically consistent watertight geometry that
can be directly imported into simulation engines; (2) enhancing texture quality by applying highlight removal and
super-resolution, resulting in high-quality, high-resolution

Automated Quality Inspection We develop an automated quality inspection module, utilizing the AestheticChecker [38] as a measure of visual quality, as it has a
positive correlation with texture richness, see Figure 4. We
found that the quality of foreground segmentation has a significant impact on the quality of 3D asset generation, so
we further build a ImageSegChecker using GPT-4o for foreground extraction quality assessment, see Figure 5. To ensure robust segmentation quality across different domains,
we provide three different foreground segmentation models,
SAM[20], REMBG[15], RMBG14[2]. If ImageSegChecker
detects a segmentation failure, the system switches to an alternative model for retry. A MeshGeoChecker inspects the
asset by rendering four orthogonal views and assessing geometric completeness and rationality, see Figure 6. Assets
4

that pass the quality inspection are converted into URDF
format and stored. Those that fail any stage of the pipeline
are sent back to the corresponding generation step using adjusted settings and seeds.

present in Figure 7 the improvement in mesh texture quality
achieved by the optimized texture back-projection module.

Algorithm 1: Compute Texture by Multi-View
Color Images Back-Projection

5.31

5.32

5.11

4.50

Input: I ∈ RN ×H0 ×W0 ×3 : multi-view color
images;
M = (V, F ): input mesh, where
V is mesh vertices, F is mesh faces;
W ∈ RN : view confidence weights;
θ: angle threshold (default: 70◦ ).
Output: T ∈ RHtex ×Wtex ×3 : texture uv map.

4.58

Figure 4. AestheticChecker is used to evaluate the texture quality
of generated assets. Assets displaying richer texture details receiving higher scores.

1. Delighting Color Image
Igrid ∈ R(N ×H0 )×W0 ×3 ← I ∈ RN ×H0 ×W0 ×3
′
3
Igrid
= DELIGHT(Igrid )
′
4
Id ∈ RN ×H0 ×W0 ×3 ← Igrid
∈ R(N ×H0 )×W0 ×3
5 2. Super Resolution Color Image
6
Isr = {SR(Id,i ) | i = 1, . . . , N }
7
Isr ∈ RN ×H×W ×3 where H =
H0 × upscale h, W = W0 × upscale w
8 3. Mesh Geometry Buffer Rendering
9
M ∈ {0, 1}N ×H×W : per-pixel visibility mask;
10
D ∈ [0, 1]N ×H×W : normalized depth map;
11
N ∈ RN ×H×W ×3 : view-space normals;
12
U ∈ [0, 1]N ×H×W ×2 : per-pixel UV;
13 4. Back-Projection per View then Fusion
14
v = [0, 0, 1]T
▷ Camera view direction
15
Initialize T = 0 and C = 0
▷ Texture and
confidence map
16
for each view i = 1 to N do
17
Ci ← max(0, Ni · v)
18
Ci [Ci < cos(θ)] ← 0 ▷ Exclude large angles
19
Ei ← Canny(Di )
20
Mi′ ← Mi ∧ (Ei < 0.5)
▷ Exclude edge
21
Ci [Mi′ = 0] ← 0
22
Ci ← Ci × Wi
23
for each valid pixel p where Mi′ [p] = 1 do
24
(u, v) ← Ui [p] × [Wtex , Htex ]
▷ Map
UV to texture space
25
Scatter Ii [p] × Ci [p] to T (u, v) ▷ Scatter
color with confidence weight
26
Scatter Ci [p] to C(u, v)
▷ Scatter
confidence map
27
end
28
end
T
29
T = C+ϵ
▷ Texture fusion by confidence
30 return T
1

2

NO. The segmentation has truncated
the bottom part of the chair's legs.

NO. The legs of the chair are significantly truncated.

Figure 5. Examples of segmentation failure cases automatically
filtered by ImageSegChecker.

No. The cup has two
handles, which is unusual
and likely unintended for a
typical cup design.

NO. The images show a black object
intersecting with the chair's legs,
indicating that the geometry may be
improperly modeled.

Pass

Figure 6. Examples of geometric rationality inspection by MeshGeoChecker.

Texture Back Projection Optimization Unlike methods like Trellis that rely on optimization-based baking of
multi-view RGB images rendered from 3DGS[19] back into
3D space, our optimized approach employs a geometrydetermined projection scheme fused with view normals.
Before re-projecting textures back into 3D space, we apply
global highlight removal and super-resolution to the RGB
images, resulting in high-quality, 2K resolution texture UV
maps. Specifically, we use a delighting model[41] to remove lighting effects from the multi-view textures while
maintaining consistent style and brightness across views.
We further apply Real-ESRGAN [44] to independently perform 4x super-resolution on each view, enhancing the resolution to 2048x2048. Our experiments show that independent super-resolution for each view does not compromise the consistency or quality of the final 3D asset texture.
The algorithmic workflow is illustrated in Algorithm 1. We
5

Bohemian terracotta cup with colorful glaze

Figure 7. From left to right: the original image, the result of our
optimized texture back-projection, and the result using Trellis’s
original texture back-projection. Our method effectively mitigates
the influence of highlights and shadows on the mesh texture while
producing significantly sharper texture details.

Sleek black drone, red sensors

Antique brass key, intricate filigree

Antique pocket watch, exposed gears

Screwdriver with bright orange handle

European style wooden dressing table

3.2. Text-to-3D Object Generation
Method Overview The Text-to-3D module is designed
for highly controllable generation of 3D object assets with
diverse geometry and textures. To achieve this, the textto-3D task is decomposed into two stages: text-to-image
and image-to-3D. This decoupling brings several advantages. In large-scale asset production, it enables early-stage
automatic quality inspection, allowing the system to filter out samples that fail foreground segmentation check or
contain semantics inconsistent with the text description before committing computational resources to 3D generation.
More importantly, this modular design improves iteration
flexibility and reduces maintenance costs. It also allows
the pipeline to fully benefit from ongoing advancements
in the text-to-image and image-to-3D communities, supporting continuous improvement in controllability, scalability, and asset generation quality. Specifically, Kolors[40]
is used as our text-to-image generation model, as it supports high-quality image generation from both Chinese and
English prompts. For the image-to-3D stage, we maintain a single unified service, EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D, to
streamline system complexity. As shown in Figure 8, compared to Trellis-text-xlarge[50], our two-stage design offers improved controllability and generation quality, while
significantly reducing the maintenance cost associated with
end-to-end text-to-3D models. The large-scale asset generation workflow for text-to-3D is illustrated in Figure 9.

Heavy-duty drill with metal casing

Ours

Pastel pink fascinator with lace and pearls

Trellis-text-xlarge

Ours

Trellis-text-xlarge

Figure 8. Qualitative comparison of Text-to-3D result. The left
column shows results generated by our method, while the right
column shows results from TRELLIS-text-xlarge. Our method
produces significantly higher-quality outputs that better align with
the input text descriptions.
Prompt Generation Text to Image Image to 3D
success

100, different styles cups

fail

• Minimalist white ceramic
cup with sleek handle.
• Industrial stainless steel
mug with matte finish.
• Vintage crystal glass with
intricate cut patterns.
• Bohemian terracotta cup
with colorful glaze.
• ……

Data Storage
Quality
Inspection

success

Physics
Restoration
URDF
convertor

……

……

3D Assets
URDF

Figure 9. EmbodiedGen Text-to-3D module for large-scale 3D asset generation. A prompt generator decomposes user requirements
into prompts targeting different asset styles. The pipeline proceeds
through text-to-image and image-to-3D stages, each equipped
with automatic quality inspection and retry mechanisms. The final
URDF asset with complete geometry, realistic scale, and physical
properties, is persistently stored.

Evaluation of Automated Quality Inspection We evaluate the efficiency of the automated quality inspection module in large-scale 3d asset generation. We construct the
automated quality inspection pipeline based on AestheticChecker, ImageSegChecker, and MeshGeoChecker, as introduced in Section 3.1. During evaluation, a generated asset is considered usable if it satisfies the following criteria: geometric and textural consistency with the input text
description, geometric completeness, texture richness, and
compatibility with simulation engines. Otherwise, it is classified as unusable. We define precision as the proportion of
assets identified as unusable by the automated checkers that
are indeed unusable, and recall as the proportion of all truly

unusable assets that are correctly flagged by the checkers.
We generated 150 cup 3d assets and manually annotated
them. Among these, 107 were labeled as usable and 43 as
unusable. The automated quality inspection achieved a precision of 68.7% and a recall of 76.7%. While these metrics
are not yet above 90%, the current system substantially reduces the manual effort required for asset screening. Moreover, we expect that this pipeline will continue to improve
as multi-modal large models advance, further enhancing automated quality assessment in the future.
6

3.3. Articulated Object Generation
Articulated objects such as cabinets, drawers and appliances
are common in real world environments. Modeling these
objects accurately requires not only capturing their geometric structure but also understanding their motion behavior
and part connectivity. This capability is fundamental for
tasks in virtual simulation, robotics, and interactive environments [14, 27, 33].

A storage furniture with two doors on the top,
three drawers in the middle, and one drawer at
the bottom.

A storage furniture with two large doors at the top,
eight small drawers in the middle arranged in two
columns of four, and one wide drawer at the bottom.

Method Overview We use DIPO [48], a controllable generation framework that constructs articulated 3D objects
from a dual-state image pair. One image shows the object
in a resting state, and the other shows it in an articulated
state. This dual-state input format encodes both structural
and kinematic information, enabling the model to better resolve motion ambiguity and predict joint behavior. The generation process is based on a diffusion transformer that integrates these two images using a specialized dual-state injection module at each layer. DIPO also includes a chainof-thought based Graph Reasoner that infers connectivity
relationship between each part. The resulting articulation
graph is used as an attention prior to enhance generation
consistency and plausibility.

A table with a base, eight drawers evenly distributed
on both sides, and one large drawer in the middle
just beneath the tabletop.

A storage furniture with four doors on the top,
three drawers in the middle, and six drawers at
the bottom arranged in two columns.

A storage furniture with four doors at the top, six
drawers in the middle arranged in two rows of three,
two larger drawers in the middle, and two smaller
drawers on the left and right sides at the bottom.

A table with one drawer in the middle, two drawers on
the left side, and one drawer on the right side.

Figure 10. Visual examples of articulated objects constructed by
the LLM agent based workflow.

paradigm allows us to capitalize on continuous improvements in community foundation models, enabling costeffective and scalable generation of view-consistent textures
with minimal retraining effort.
Model Design We develop a model named GeoLifter, a
module that extends the capabilities of foundation text-toimage diffusion models to multi-view generation with geometric consistency. GeoLifter injects geometric control
into the base diffusion model through cross-attention mechanisms, enabling view-consistent texture generation conditioned on 3D geometry. We adopt Kolors text-to-image[40]
as the base diffusion model. In contrast to approaches such
as ControlNet[55], which duplicate and train a separate encoder branch of the base model’s U-Net. GeoLifter remains
lightweight and highly extensible. Its parameter size does
not grow with the depth of the base model, making it more
efficient and easier to integrate with evolving diffusion architectures.
Given an input mesh, we render normal maps, position maps and binary masks from six predefined
camera views (elevations ∈ {20◦ , −10◦ }, azimuths ∈
{0◦ , 60◦ , 120◦ , 180◦ , 240◦ , 300◦ }). For each view, the normal and position maps are rendered in image space from
camera view, and concatenated along the spatial (height and
width) dimensions within each attribute. The different attribute types (normal, position, mask) are then concatenated
along the channel dimension to form the geometric condition input G ∈ RH×W ×7 . The normal map encodes surface
normals interpolated per vertex and projected to the image
plane. The position map stores the XYZ coordinates (in object space) of visible vertices. The mask is a binary segmentation map. The geometric condition G is then implicitly
encoded into a feature embedding, which is progressively
injected into the denoising process of the diffusion model
via cross-attention, leveraging zero convolution to ensure

Automatic Articulated Object Data Augmentation Beyond model design, to improve generalization on complex
articulated object generation, we use an automatic data augmentation pipeline to synthesize articulated object layouts
from natural language prompts using grid-based spatial reasoning and part retrieval from existing 3D datasets. The resulting PM-X dataset comprises 600 structurally diverse articulated objects, each annotated with rendered images and
physical properties. Figure 10 shows representative examples from the PM-X dataset.
Qualitative comparison Figures 1 illustrates representative results of generated objects with real-world image inputs. Explore more demos of dynamic articulated object on
our project page.

3.4. Texture Generation
Method Overview The texture generation module is designed to perform multi-style texture generation and editing
for 3D object assets. Given a 3D mesh as input, it outputs
a textured 3D mesh with generated visual appearance. Instead of training a multi-view diffusion model from scratch,
we design a plug-gable and extensible module that leverages existing 2D text-to-image foundation models and extends their capabilities into the 3D domain. Our approach
enables the generation of diverse and high-quality textures
that are geometrically consistent across views. This design
7

Style reference
(optional)

GeoLifter

normal&mask map

cross attn

𝑍!

Delight & SR
Base model

Input mesh

Text prompt : A pink robot
holding a sign with a heart on it.

Back
project

Neg prompt: blur, specular.

position map
Frozen layers

Textured mesh

Trainable layers

Figure 11. Overview of EmbodiedGen Texture Generation Module. Given a mesh and a text prompt, the module generates six-view
consistent textures with controllable styles via text, reference image, or both. Geometry-aware conditions (normals, positions, masks) are
extracted and injected into a diffusion model via the GeoLifter module. The outputs are refined with illumination removal and superresolution, then back-projected to the mesh as described in Algorithm 1.

minimal interference with the base model decoder at the
start of training.
The text prompt supports both positive and negative
prompts, and accepts multi-lingual input, including both
Chinese and English descriptions, to specify the desired texture style and appearance. In addition to textual prompts,
users may optionally provide an RGB image as a reference
style, which serves as a complementary control signal to
the language input. Users can provide a text prompt only,
a reference image only, or both simultaneously. This design enables highly controllable and expressive texture generation by jointly leveraging semantic guidance and visual
style cues.
We observe that GeoLifter, with its lightweight geometric conditioning design, effectively preserves the texture
generation capability of the underlying foundation model,
while significantly improving spatial and geometric consistency across views. Following the multi-view texture generation, we apply illumination removal and super-resolution
techniques and project the refined textures back into 3D
space to obtain the final textured mesh, equipped with a
high-resolution 2K UV map as described in Algorithm 1.

Point matches
Search points
Reference points

Figure 12. Blue dots: reference points; red dots: projected correspondences in other views; green lines: matches. The spatial loss
is applied to let the latent features of matched points closer, enhancing cross-view alignment.

hancing cross-view coherence. The final loss 3 is obtained
by adding LLDM and Lspatial , λldm and λspatial is set to 1
and 0.02 respectively.
h
i
2
LLDM = Ex,ϵ,t ∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt , t, c)∥
(1)
B

1 X
1{|rb |>0∧|sb |>0} ·SmoothL1 (fb (rb ), fb (sb ))
Lspatial =
B
b=1
(2)
L = λLDM LLDM + λspatial Lspatial

Loss Design On top of the original loss 1 used in latent
diffusion models[37], we introduce spatial loss 2 as a geometric consistency constraint in the latent space, where B is
the batch size, rb and sb are the reference and search point
sets for the b-th sample(visualized in Figure 12). fb (·) ∈
RC×Nb denotes the extracted feature vectors at the corresponding coordinates. Standard element-wise smooth L1
loss is applied to encourages the latent features of pixels
corresponding to the same 3D point (projected across multiple views) to remain close in feature space, thereby en-

(3)

Qualitative Comparison We conduct a qualitative comparison between our method and several state-of-theart texture generation methods, including TEXTure[36],
SyncMVD[24], Paint3D[54], Meshy[25], and Hunyuan3d2[12]. As shown in Figure 13, our method consistently
produces higher-quality 3D textures, with superior geometric consistency across views. Furthermore, our method
uniquely supports specified text to be directly generated on
3D surfaces.
8

A gray horse head with flying mane and brown eyes

A brown horse head with a classic texture and flying mane, and black eyes

A black alarm clock with a retro Roman numeral dial, with a classic charm

A wooden alarm clock, showing the time in Arabic numerals

A realistic 3D robot holding a wooden sign, red main body purple eyes, the sign says "中国"

A robot with a yellow body and blue eyes holding a sign, word "Hello" written on the sign
TEXTure

SyncMVD

Paint3D

Meshy

Hunyuan3d-2

Ours

Figure 13. EmbodiedGen texture generation module effectively adheres to text descriptions, generating high-quality textures with strong
spatial and geometric consistency. It also demonstrates robust control over text generation on textures, accurately rendering common
Chinese and English text.

3.5. 3D Scene Generation

ical role. We develop a scalable and efficient framework
for 3D scene generation. The system follows a modular
pipeline that transforms multi-modal inputs into panoramic
images, which are then used to generate 3D scenes with

Method Overview Beyond 3D object asset generation,
scene diversity as background context plays an equally crit9

Panorama Generation
Text prompt
Modern minimalist
interior scene, grey
cabinet before
frosted glass.
Image prompt

PanoSelector

Scene 3DGS & Mesh Generation
Novel view
Synthesis
Inpainting
Mesh

Mesh
repair
Style prompt

Physics restoration

Init
3DGS

Real Scale Restoration
& Coordinate System
Alignment
Super-resolution cubemap
Mesh&
3DGS

refined
3DGS

Figure 14. Overview of EmbodiedGen 3D Scene Generation. A panorama is generated from a text prompt or input image, guided by a style
prompt. After quality assessment via vlm-based selector, a refined mesh and 3DGS[19] are generated by panorama projection, inpainting,
and repair. Super-resolution is used to enhance 3DGS appearance details, followed by real scale and alignment adjustments.
scene1

consistent real-world scale. The framework consists of
three main stages: (1) panoramic image generation, (2)
3D scene generation in 3DGS[19] and mesh representation
from panorama, and (3)scale alignment and standardized
output, as illustrated in Figure 14.

w/o style
prompt

Panoramic Image Generation Our method supports
both text- and image-based input modalities, or a combination of both, enabling flexible and efficient generation of high-quality panoramic images. For text-driven
generation, user-provided scene descriptions are translated
into panoramic views using Diffusion360 model[13], which
have demonstrated strong performance in this task. For
image-driven generation, we employ Qwen [10] to extract
semantic descriptions from the input image. The image and
its corresponding textual description are then jointly processed by the panorama generation model[13] to generate
semantically aligned panoramas(see Figure 15). To ensure
quality and reliability, we introduce the PanoSelector module, which is built upon Qwen [10], automatically evaluates and filters the generated panoramas based on structural
quality metrics, such as floor and wall consistency. This
guarantees that only high-quality outputs are forwarded to
the geometry generation stage.

Ours

scene2

w/o style
prompt

Ours

Figure 15. Qualitative Comparison With and Without Style
Prompts. “w/o style prompt” lacks explicit style guidance, while
“Ours” uses style-aware prompting, yielding more coherent textures and better stylistic alignment across scenes.

ther refine the initial 3DGS, effectively enhancing the detail
quality of the final 3DGS output as in Figure 16. We show
generated 3D scene quality comparison with worldgen[51]
in Figure 17.

Scene 3D Representation Generation After obtaining
high-quality panoramas, the system proceeds to generate
the corresponding 3D representation in 3DGS and mesh
based on Pano2Room[32]. An initial mesh is generated from the panoramic input and further refined through
mesh optimization to improve both geometric accuracy and
reconstruct-ability. The optimized mesh is then converted
into a 3DGS representation. To enhance visual fidelity,
views rendered from the optimized mesh are converted
into cubemaps and passed through the super-resolution
model[44]. The super-resolved images are then used to fur-

Physics Restoration To produce realistic and metrically
consistent 3D scenes, the system performs absolute scale
estimation by predicting real-world dimensions such as
building height from the input panoramas and their semantic descriptions. A dedicated scale estimation module, built
upon the Qwen model [10], infers these scale factors to
enable lossless rescaling of both the mesh and 3DGS[19]
10

scene1

scene2

trated in Figure 21, with the generated 3D assets evaluated via closed loop simulation in the Isaac Lab[26] environment. Figure 23 shows how assets generated by EmbodiedGen Text-to-3D can be used in navigation and obstacle avoidance tasks within the OpenAI Gym[4] simulation
framework.

w/o super
resolution

Ours

RoboSplatter: Integration of 3DGS Rendering into
Physical Simulation Existing simulators are typically
built upon traditional OpenGL-based rendering techniques,
which involve complex environment modeling, lighting
setup, and ray-based rendering calculations. These approaches often suffer from high computational cost and
limited photorealism. With the rapid advancement of
3DGS[19], more realistic and efficient rendering solutions
have emerged. We integrate 3DGS rendering with established physical simulators such as MuJoCo [42] and Isaac
Lab [26], enabling visually rich and physically accurate
simulations. To this end, we develop RoboSplatter, a
3DGS-based simulation rendering framework tailored for
robotics simulation. As shown in Figure 20, RoboSplatter
works seamlessly with MuJoCo to simulate robotic manipulation tasks, such as robotic arm grasping, while delivering
high visual fidelity powered by 3DGS technology.

Figure 16. Qualitative comparison with and without superresolution. The generated 3D scene show sharper and highfrequency detailed with super-resolution. Zoom in for details.
Text input
A living
room with
a wooden
floor and
a rug in
middle

Image input

Ours

WorldGen

Figure 17. Qualitative Comparison with WorldGen[51] Our
method produces more detailed textures and more complete geometry than WorldGen, under both text and image input settings.

5. Conclusion
representations. Additionally, the coordinate system is recentered to the floor plane of the scene, with the axes
aligned according to either the camera direction from the input image or the orientation implied by the textual description. The resulting output is a scale-aligned, high-fidelity
3D scene asset, ready for downstream use in virtual and
augmented reality and robotics.

In this work, we present EmbodiedGen, the first comprehensive platform for interactive 3D world generation to the
needs of embodied intelligence related research. Our system enables controllable and diverse creation of real-tosim digital twins, alongside large-scale generation of 3D
rigid and articulated object and 3D scene assets. These
assets can be seamlessly integrated into various simulators such as OpenAI Gym[4], Isaac Lab[26], MuJoCo[42]
and SAPIEN[49] for tasks such as ground-truth generation,
evaluation, and reinforcement learning. The generated assets achieve state-of-the-art quality in both visual fidelity
and physical realism, and are enriched with detailed annotations, including quality inspection labels, watertight geometry, and dual 3D representations in both 3DGS[19] and
mesh formats. To promote research and practical adoption,
we release the pipeline as an open-source, user-friendly
toolkit and service.

4. Application
Large-scale 3D Asset Generation Figure 18 showcases
the capability of the EmbodiedGen Text-to-3D module to
generate large-scale 3D assets for embodied intelligence
tasks, producing watertight and stylistically diverse meshes
aligned with textual descriptions. This capability enables
low-cost augmentation of interactive 3D assets for simulation and downstream training and evaluation.
Visual Appearance Editing of 3D Mesh Figure 19
demonstrates the capability of the EmbodiedGen texture
generation module to generate and edit photorealistic textures with rich visual details. The edited 3D assets can be
used for training data augmentation, enhancing model generalization in visual appearance understanding.
Real-to-Sim: Digital Twins creation The real-to-sim capabilities of EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D module is illus11

Figure 18. EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D: large-scale and diverse 3D object asset generation.

Figure 19. EmbodiedGen texture generation module enables rich and flexible visual texture editing.

12

Figure 20. EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D: Digital twin creation and simulation in RoboSplatter and MuJoCo[42].

13

Figure 21. EmbodiedGen Image-to-3D: Real-to-sim closed-loop simulation evaluation of a grasping model in Isaac Lab environment [26].

Figure 22. Interaction 3D World Generation with EmbodiedGen. EmbodiedGen enables easy construction of diverse interactive 3D worlds
for simulating and evaluating dual-arm shoe-grasping tasks in RoboTwin[28].

Figure 23. EmbodiedGen Text-to-3D: Real-to-sim object transfer and quadruped navigation with obstacle avoidance in OpenAI Gym[4].

14

References

[16] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2
[17] Zehuan Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Haoran Wang, Ran Yi,
Lizhuang Ma, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. Mv-adapter:
Multi-view consistent image generation made easy, 2024. 2
[18] Pushkal Katara, Zhou Xian, and Katerina Fragkiadaki.
Gen2sim: Scaling up robot learning in simulation with generative models, 2023. 3
[19] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler,
and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering, 2023. 3, 4, 5, 10, 11
[20] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao,
Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and
Ross Girshick. Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
4
[21] Jiayi Liu, Denys Iliash, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, and
Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Singapo: Single image controlled generation of articulated parts in objects, 2025. 3
[22] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. Zero-1-to-3:
Zero-shot one image to 3d object, 2023. 2
[23] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. Zero-1-to-3:
Zero-shot one image to 3d object, 2023. 2
[24] Yuxin Liu, Minshan Xie, Hanyuan Liu, and Tien-Tsin Wong.
Text-guided texturing by synchronized multi-view diffusion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12891, 2023. 8
[25] Meshy.ai. Meshy.ai: Ai-powered 3d mesh generation, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-05-09. 8
[26] Mayank Mittal, Calvin Yu, Qinxi Yu, Jingzhou Liu, Nikita
Rudin, David Hoeller, Jia Lin Yuan, Ritvik Singh, Yunrong Guo, Hammad Mazhar, Ajay Mandlekar, Buck Babich,
Gavriel State, Marco Hutter, and Animesh Garg. Orbit: A
unified simulation framework for interactive robot learning
environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(6):
3740–3747, 2023. 1, 3, 4, 11, 14
[27] Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Where2act: From pixels
to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 6813–6823, 2021. 7
[28] Yao Mu, Tianxing Chen, Shijia Peng, Zanxin Chen, Zeyu
Gao, Yude Zou, Lunkai Lin, Zhiqiang Xie, and Ping Luo.
Robotwin: Dual-arm robot benchmark with generative digital twins (early version), 2025. 3, 14
[29] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved
denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 8162–8171. PMLR,
2021. 2
[30] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion, 2022. 2
[31] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion, 2022. 2
[32] Guo Pu, Yiming Zhao, and Zhouhui Lian. Pano2room:
Novel view synthesis from a single indoor panorama. In SIG-

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida,
Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al.
Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774,
2023. 2, 4
[2] BRIA AI. Rmbg-1.4: Background removal model. https:
//huggingface.co/briaai/RMBG-1.4, 2023. Accessed: 2025-05-19. 4
[3] Raphael Bensadoun, Tom Monnier, Yanir Kleiman, Filippos
Kokkinos, Yawar Siddiqui, Mahendra Kariya, Omri Harosh,
Roman Shapovalov, Benjamin Graham, Emilien Garreau,
Animesh Karnewar, Ang Cao, Idan Azuri, Iurii Makarov,
Eric-Tuan Le, Antoine Toisoul, David Novotny, Oran Gafni,
Natalia Neverova, and Andrea Vedaldi. Meta 3d gen, 2024.
3
[4] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas
Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and Wojciech Zaremba.
Openai gym, 2016. 1, 3, 11, 14
[5] David Charatan, Sizhe Li, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Vincent
Sitzmann. pixelsplat: 3d gaussian splats from image pairs
for scalable generalizable 3d reconstruction, 2024. 2
[6] Yuedong Chen, Haofei Xu, Chuanxia Zheng, Bohan Zhuang,
Marc Pollefeys, Andreas Geiger, Tat-Jen Cham, and Jianfei
Cai. MVSplat: Efficient 3D Gaussian Splatting from Sparse
Multi-view Images, page 370–386. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. 2
[7] Zoey Chen, Aaron Walsman, Marius Memmel, Kaichun Mo,
Alex Fang, Karthikeya Vemuri, Alan Wu, Dieter Fox, and
Abhishek Gupta. Urdformer: A pipeline for constructing
articulated simulation environments from real-world images,
2024. 3
[8] Jaeyoung Chung, Suyoung Lee, Hyeongjin Nam, Jaerin Lee,
and Kyoung Mu Lee. Luciddreamer: Domain-free generation of 3d gaussian splatting scenes, 2023. 3
[9] Tianyuan Dai, Josiah Wong, Yunfan Jiang, Chen Wang, Cem
Gokmen, Ruohan Zhang, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Automated creation of digital cousins for robust policy learning,
2024. 3
[10] Jinze Bai et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16609, 2023. 4, 10
[11] Yicong Hong et al. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for
single image to 3d, 2024. 2
[12] Zibo Zhao et al. Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffusion models
for high resolution textured 3d assets generation, 2025. 2, 8
[13] Mengyang Feng, Jinlin Liu, Miaomiao Cui, and Xuansong
Xie. Diffusion360: Seamless 360 degree panoramic image
generation based on diffusion models, 2023. 10
[14] Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Kiana Ehsani, and Shuran Song. Act
the part: Learning interaction strategies for articulated object
part discovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 15752–15761,
2021. 7
[15] Daniel Gatis. rembg, 2025. A tool to remove images background. 4

15

[48] Ruiqi Wu, Xinjie Wang, Liu Liu, Chunle Guo, Jiaxiong Qiu,
Chongyi Li, Lichao Huang, Zhizhong Su, and Ming-Ming
Cheng. Dipo: Dual-state images controlled articulated object
generation powered by diverse data, 2025. 7
[49] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao
Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan,
He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and
Hao Su. SAPIEN: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 1, 3, 4, 11
[50] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng
Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong
Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01506, 2024. 3, 4, 6
[51] Ziyang Xie. Worldgen: Generate any 3d scene in seconds.
https://github.com/ZiYang- xie/WorldGen,
2025. 3, 10, 11
[52] Yinghao Xu, Zifan Shi, Wang Yifan, Hansheng Chen,
Ceyuan Yang, Sida Peng, Yujun Shen, and Gordon Wetzstein. Grm: Large gaussian reconstruction model for efficient 3d reconstruction and generation, 2024. 2
[53] Shuai Yang, Jing Tan, Mengchen Zhang, Tong Wu, Yixuan
Li, Gordon Wetzstein, Ziwei Liu, and Dahua Lin. Layerpano3d: Layered 3d panorama for hyper-immersive scene
generation, 2025. 3
[54] Xianfang Zeng, Xin Chen, Zhongqi Qi, Wen Liu, Zibo Zhao,
Zhibin Wang, Bin Fu, Yong Liu, and Gang Yu. Paint3d:
Paint anything 3d with lighting-less texture diffusion models.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4252–4262, 2024. 8
[55] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding
conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models, 2023.
7
[56] Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu,
Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi
Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for
creating high-quality 3d assets, 2024. 3
[57] Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu,
Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi
Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for
creating high-quality 3d assets, 2024. 2
[58] Yuqing Zhang, Yuan Liu, Zhiyu Xie, Lei Yang, Zhongyuan
Liu, Mengzhou Yang, Runze Zhang, Qilong Kou, Cheng Lin,
Wenping Wang, and Xiaogang Jin. Dreammat: High-quality
pbr material generation with geometry- and light-aware diffusion models, 2024. 2
[59] Haiyang Zhou, Xinhua Cheng, Wangbo Yu, Yonghong Tian,
and Li Yuan. Holodreamer: Holistic 3d panoramic world
generation from text descriptions, 2024. 3
[60] Shijie Zhou, Zhiwen Fan, Dejia Xu, Haoran Chang,
Pradyumna Chari, Tejas Bharadwaj, Suya You, Zhangyang
Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Dreamscene360: Unconstrained text-to-3d scene generation with panoramic gaussian
splatting, 2024. 3

GRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers, page 1–11. ACM,
2024. 10
[33] Shengyi Qian and David F Fouhey. Understanding 3d object interaction from a single image. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 21753–21763, 2023. 7
[34] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario
Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019. 2
[35] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen
Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision, 2021. 2
[36] Elad Richardson, Gal Metzer, Yuval Alaluf, Raja Giryes,
and Daniel Cohen-Or. Texture: Text-guided texturing of 3d
shapes, 2023. 8
[37] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 8
[38] Christoph Schuhmann.
Aesthetic subsets in laion
2170337258 samples, 2025. Retrieved May 16, 2025. 4
[39] Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li,
and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view diffusion for 3d generation, 2024. 2
[40] Kolors Team. Kolors: Effective training of diffusion model
for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint,
2024. 6, 7
[41] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team.
Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling
diffusion models for high resolution textured 3d assets
generation, 2025.
https : / / huggingface . co /
tencent/Hunyuan3D-2/tree/main/hunyuan3ddelight-v2-0. 3, 5
[42] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A
physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
pages 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. 1, 3, 4, 11, 13
[43] Guangcong Wang, Peng Wang, Zhaoxi Chen, Wenping
Wang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Perf: Panoramic
neural radiance field from a single panorama, 2023. 3
[44] Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan.
Real-esrgan: Training real-world blind super-resolution with
pure synthetic data. In International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW). 5, 10
[45] Yian Wang, Bingjie Tang, Chuang Gan, Dieter Fox, Kaichun
Mo, Yashraj Narang, and Iretiayo Akinola. Matchmaker:
Automated asset generation for robotic assembly, 2025. 3
[46] Kailu Wu, Fangfu Liu, Zhihan Cai, Runjie Yan, Hanyang
Wang, Yating Hu, Yueqi Duan, and Kaisheng Ma. Unique3d:
High-quality and efficient 3d mesh generation from a single
image, 2024. 2
[47] Ruiqi Wu, Liangyu Chen, Tong Yang, Chunle Guo, Chongyi
Li, and Xiangyu Zhang. Lamp: Learn a motion pattern for
few-shot video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 7089–7098, 2024. 2

16

