GaussianGrasper: 3D Language Gaussian Splatting for
Open-vocabulary Robotic Grasping

arXiv:2403.09637v1 [cs.RO] 14 Mar 2024

Yuhang Zheng, Xiangyu Chen, Yupeng Zheng, Songen Gu, Runyi Yang, Bu Jin, Pengfei Li, Chengliang Zhong,
Zengmao Wang, Lina Liu, Chao Yang, Dawei Wang, Zhen Chen, Xiaoxiao Long∗ , Meiqing Wang∗
Abstract—Constructing a 3D scene capable of accommodating
open-ended language queries, is a pivotal pursuit, particularly
within the domain of robotics. Such technology facilitates robots
in executing object manipulations based on human language
directives. To tackle this challenge, some research efforts have
been dedicated to the development of language-embedded implicit
fields. However, implicit fields (e.g. NeRF) encounter limitations
due to the necessity of processing a large number of input views
for reconstruction, coupled with their inherent inefficiencies in
inference. Thus, we present the GaussianGrasper, which utilizes 3D
Gaussian Splatting to explicitly represent the scene as a collection
of Gaussian primitives. Our approach takes a limited set of RGBD views and employs a tile-based splatting technique to create
a feature field. In particular, we propose an Efficient Feature
Distillation (EFD) module that employs contrastive learning to
efficiently and accurately distill language embeddings derived
from foundational models. With the reconstructed geometry of the
Gaussian field, our method enables the pre-trained grasping model
to generate collision-free grasp pose candidates. Furthermore, we
propose a normal-guided grasp module to select the best grasp
pose. Through comprehensive real-world experiments, we demonstrate that GaussianGrasper enables robots to accurately query
and grasp objects with language instructions, providing a new
solution for language-guided manipulation tasks. Data and codes
can be available at https://github.com/MrSecant/GaussianGrasper.
Index Terms—Language-guided Robotic Manipulation, 3D
Gaussian Splatting, Language Feature Field

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been an increasing scholarly focus on
language-guided robotic manipulation due to its vast potential
in facilitating human-robot interaction, enabling robotic home
services, and enhancing flexible manufacturing. Imagine that
a robot is asked to pick up the water cup in a cluttered,
unstructured environment, it needs to (1) locate the water
cup via responding to language description; (2) be aware
of the geometry to execute a stable grasp. In this process,
understanding the diverse objects with different shapes and
material properties in the open world is the pivotal challenge.
Although many works have proposed various solutions,
existing capabilities of scene understanding are insufficient
Yuhang Zheng is with the School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Beihang University and EncoSmart. Xiangyu Chen and Zhen Chen
are with the EncoSmart. Yupeng Zheng and Bu Jin are with the Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Songen Gu, Pengfei Li and
Chengliang Zhong are with the AIR, Tsinghua University. Runyi Yang is with
the Imperial College London. Lina Liu is with the China Mobile Research
Institute. Zengmao Wang is with the School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University. Chao Yang is with the Shanghai AI Laboratory. Dawei Wang and
Xiaoxiao Long are with the Department of Computer Science, the University
of Hong Kong. Meiqing Wang is with the School of Mechanical Engineering
and Automation, Beihang University.
∗ Xiaoxiao Long and Meiqing Wang are the corresponding authors.
Email: xxlong@connect.hku.hk, wangmq@buaa.edu.cn

View 1

Language query: Hamburger

View 2
2D Feature

3D
Localization

LERF

Ours
Ours
LERF
2D Feature
Fusion

Fig. 1. We present a comparison between our method, 2D feature fusion, and
LERF. When given the language query "hamburger", the features extracted
by the 2D foundation models exhibit inconsistencies between two viewpoints,
and LERF lacks clear segmentation boundaries. Consequently, they both suffer
from imprecise 3D localization, as depicted by the yellow and purple 3D
bounding boxes. In contrast, our method reconstructs a consistent feature field
and achieves more precise 3D localization.

to afford language-guided manipulation. Most existing works
are based on 2D images [1], [2], [3], [4] which are efficient
but have limitations for robotic manipulation as robots can not
easily infer visual occlusion and spatial relation from multiview misaligned images.
To obtain precise 3D positions for robotic manipulation,
recent works have focused on 3D representations. A straightforward approach is leveraging 2D visual models [5], [6], [7]
to extract semantics and then fuse the 2D semantics into 3D
points or volume. However, this fusion strategy suffers from
semantic inconsistency in 3D, as the semantics provided by
the visual model are not consistent across multi-views. Other
methods [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] that use 3D backbone
to extract features and are supervised by 3D annotation or
manipulation feedback can effectively make robots explicitly
understand 3D scenes and learn skills but are difficult to apply
to the real world due to the challenges in data acquisition
and annotation. Recently, distilled feature fields (DFFs) [14],
[15], [16] which reconstruct 3D feature fields from 2D images
via implicit representation were introduced. Based on 2D-to3D distillation, recent works [17], [18] have made impressive

progress in improving 3D scene understanding and enabling
robots to interact with the physical world according to natural
language. However, DFFs can not be inflexibly applied for
robotics manipulation as most of these methods suffer from
(1) imprecise localization as these methods extract patch-level
features, resulting in ambiguous boundaries; (2) high costs of
collecting dense training views (e.g. 50 views in F3RM [17]);
(3) slow inference speed, hindering robots from responding
to language instructions in time and (4) weak ability to cope
with scene changes caused by manipulation.
To tackle problems, we introduce GaussianGrasper, an
open-world robotic manipulation system based on 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [19], which models the 3D scene as a
set of 3D Gaussian primitives. Our insight is that we (1)
reconstruct a 3D feature field via efficient feature distillation
to support language-guided localization; (2) render depth and
surface normal to provide detailed local geometry, enabling
the generation of feasible grasping poses; (3) operate Gaussian
primitives and fine-tune 3DGS to update the changed scene.
More specifically, our method enables language-guided
manipulation via the following steps: (1) Initialization: we
scan RGB-D images of a few viewpoints to initialize the
3DGS, reducing the cost of data collection. (2) Feature field
reconstruction: we propose an efficient feature distillation
(EFD) module that employs SAM [5] and CLIP [6] to extract
dense and shape-aware 2D descriptors and leverage contrastive
learning to efficiently optimize the distilled features. (3)
Localization and grasp: we use open-vocabulary queries to
locate the target object and use a pre-trained grasping module
to provide grasp poses where rendered normal is used to filter
out unfeasible proposals based on Force-closure theory. (4)
Scene updating: After executing manipulation, we update the
scene by operating corresponding Gaussian primitives and
fine-tuning 3DGS with images from fewer views.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We introduce GaussianGrasper, a robot manipulation
system implemented by a 3D Gaussian field endowed
with open-vocabulary semantics and accurate geometry
that is capable of rapid updates to support open-world
manipulation tasks guided by language.
• We propose EFD that leverages contrastive learning to
efficiently distill CLIP features and augment feature fields
with SAM segmentation prior, addressing computational
expense and boundary ambiguity challenges.
• We propose a normal-guided grasp module that uses
rendered normal to filter out unfeasible grasp poses.
• We demonstrate the system’s zero-shot generalization
capability for manipulation tasks in multiple real-world
household tabletop scenes and common objects.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Grasp Pose Detection
Grasp pose detection is the pivotal part of robot grasping,
which plays a critical role in enabling the robot to interact
with objects in the physical world. Previous 3-DoF Grasping

methods treated the grasping task as 2D pose detection [20],
[21], [22], [23], [24]. They define the grasp pose as a fixedheight oriented rectangle and predict the orientation and the
width of the rectangle. However, their predicted grasp poses
are limited to 3-DoF due to the lack of 3D geometry. To
allow robots to plan higher dexterous grasps, extensive works
focuses on 6-DoF grasping which use depth to augment the
grasp pose detection [25], [26] or leverage point cloud as input
to provide local geometry [27], [28], [29], [30], [31]. These
methods exhibit high success rate when the depth is accurate
but suffering from performance drops when encountering
photometrically challenging objects such as transparent objects.
To further improve the performance, some work fuses RGB
with depth [32], [33], [34] as RGB can alleviate the depthmissing problem.
In this paper, we use the RGB-D based method to generate
grasp poses. To achieve stable grasp, we further explicitly utilize
Force-closure theory [35] to enhance grasp pose detection where
estimated normal is used to filter out unfeasible grasp poses
(more details in Normal-guided grasp of Sec. III-C3).
B. Reconstructing 3D Feature Field For Manipulation
A number of recent work integrate 2D foundation models with 3D feature fields in contexts other than robotic
manipulation [36], [14], [37], [38], [16], [39]. Based on
the implicit representation, methods [14], [39], [16] leverage
feature distillation via neural rendering to reconstruct 3D feature
field. While as explicit representations, methods [36], [37], [38]
re-project 2D features and optimize the feature field in 3D.
For robot manipulation, recent works like F3RM [17] and
LERF-TOGO [18] leverage feature distillation to improve the
robot understanding of 3D scenes and enable language-guided
grasping. However, these methods need images from many
viewpoints as input and can not quickly update the scene to
cope with changes (movement or rotation) of objects. As an
explicit representation, SparseDFF [40] re-projects 2D features
to 3D and leverages fusion strategy to optimize the feature
field, leading to a significant reduction in usage of the number
of viewpoints. However, explicit representation is not efficient
for carrying high-dimension language features due to memory
usage and computation time.
Different from the methods above, we propose an efficient
feature distillation module based on explicit 3D Gaussians
representation which uses segmentation priors provided by
SAM to speed up feature field reconstruction and reduce the
usage of memory (more details in Sec. III-B).
III. M ETHODOLOGY
In general terms, our method aims to pick up objects or
place objects in specified locations according to the language
instructions. The pipeline is shown in Fig. 2 (a) where our
method (1) collects multi-view RGB-D images as input to
initialize 3D Gaussian field; (2) reconstructs 3D feature field via
efficient feature distillation module and (3) achieves languagedguided manipulation. Specifically, we first introduce how to
initialize 3DGS and the differentiable rasterizer of 3DGS in

1. Scan Scene and Initialize 3D Gaussian Field

2. Reconstruct 3D Gaussian Field

Multi-view RGB-D

3. Languaged-guided Manipulation
Query

EFD: Efficient Feature Distillation

Pick up the hamburger
Locate

Re-projected Point Cloud
3D Localization
Reconstruct

Feature Field (PCA shown)

Grasping model

Generate Grasp
Pose Candidates

Normal-guided Grasp
Initialize

Filter

Contrastive Loss

(a) Our Proposed Pipeline

Render
n1
α1

MLP

𝜶𝜶𝟏𝟏 + 𝜶𝜶𝟐𝟐 ≤ 𝜽𝜽𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕

√ Feasible Grasp Pose
Latent Feature 𝐿𝐿

Sample Pixel Pairs

Recovered Feature

CLIP Feature 𝐹𝐹

𝜶𝜶𝟏𝟏 + 𝜶𝜶𝟐𝟐 > 𝜽𝜽𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕

n2
α2

Contact points
Grasping line
Estimated Normal

Distillation Loss

(b) EFD: Efficient Feature Distillation

n1

× Unfeasible Grasp Pose

n2

CLIP
Segmentation Map

α1

α2

Sample Pixels

SAM
Image

Grasping

Grasp Poses

Normal Field

Depth Field

3D Gaussian Field

Execute

(c) Normal-guided Grasp

Fig. 2. The architecture of our proposed method. (a) is our proposed pipeline where we scan multi-view RGBD images for initialization and reconstruct 3D
Gaussian field via feature distillation and geometry reconstruction. Subsequently, given a language instruction, we locate the target object via open-vocabulary
querying. Grasp pose candidates for grasping the target object are then generated by a pre-trained grasping model. Finally, a normal-guided module that uses
surface normal to filter out unfeasible candidates is proposed to select the best grasp pose. (b) elaborates on EFD where we leverage contrastive learning to
constrain rendered latent feature L and only sample a few pixels to recover features to the CLIP space via an MLP. Then, the recovered features are used to
calculate distillation loss with the CLIP features. (c) shows the normal-guided grasp that utilizes Force-closure theory to filter out unfeasible grasp poses.

section III-A. Next, we elaborate on the EFD module in
section III-B. Finally, we introduce how to achieve languageguided manipulation in detail in section III-C, including
locating objects through language queries, using a pre-trained
grasping model to generate grasp poses, proposing a normalguided grasp strategy to select feasible poses and updating the
scene after manipulation.
A. Preliminaries: 3D Gaussian Splatting
1) Gaussian Primitive Initialization: 3DGS uses Structure
from Motion (SfM) [41] as the initialization part, which takes
a collection of RGB images as input and outputs a sparse point
cloud. These points construct a set of Gaussian primitives, each
defined by mean µ and a 3D covariance matrix Σ = RSS T RT ,
where R and S represent the rotation matrix and the scaling
matrix. To reduce the viewpoints and speed up initialization, we
employ multi-view depth to re-project pixels of RGB images
into the world coordinate to initialize Gaussian field. Each
point is the center of a Gaussian primitive and the rotation
matrix and scaling matrix are initialized randomly.

2) Differentiable Rasterizer for 3D Gaussians: 3DGS renders the Gaussian primitives into images in a differentiable
manner to optimize the parameters. Given a set of 3D Gaussian
primitives G = {gi | i = 1, 2, 3, .., n}, each 3D Gaussian
primitive gi is first projected onto the corresponding 2D plane
and is then sorted based on its depth di from the viewpoint
plane. By tile-based rasterization, we sum up the pixel color
C(u) after sorting each primitive:
C(u) =

X

ci αi

i

i−1
Y

(1 − αj )

(1)

j=1

where ci is a feature vector represented by spherical harmonics
(SH) and αi is obtained by multiplying Gaussian weight with
opacity α associated to Gaussian primitives.
B. Efficient Feature Distillation
We reconstruct 3D open-vocabulary feature field via extracting dense CLIP features and efficiently distilling them into 3D,

based on 3DGS. The open-vocabulary reconstruction enables
the scene to respond to natural language instructions.
1) Instance-level Segmentation Prior and Open-vocabulary
Features: To exact dense and shape-aware open-vocabulary
features, we first use SAM to produce a set of instance-level
masks. Then, we leverage CLIP to obtain open-vocabulary
features for each mask. Concretely, we process the input
images through SAM to obtain a set of mask proposals
and corresponding scores. Based on these scores, a nonmaximum suppression strategy [42] is then implemented to
filter superfluous masks. The resultant filtered set of masks
constitutes a segmentation map of the image, representing
instance-level priors. After filtration, we process each valid
mask-aligned image region into the CLIP model to extract openvocabulary features. Finally, we incorporate CLIP features of
all masks into a feature map, referred to as F .

where ui and vi are pixels in the ith sampled pair. As the
contrastive loss homogenizes the features within each mask,
we only need to recover latent features of per mask to the
CLIP space and subsequently minimize the distance between
the recovered feature and the CLIP feature. In practice, we
randomly sample the same number of pixels within each mask,
whose latent features are then recovered via a trainable decoder
Ψ composed of two fully connected layers. We calculate the
distillation loss between the recovered feature and the CLIP
feature of all sampled k pixels, defined as:
k

Ldistill = 1 −

1X
Ψ(L(i)) · F (i)
k i=1

(4)

By enhancing the low-dimension open-vocabulary feature
embedding of 3D Gaussian and using contrastive learning
which leverages the segmentation prior derived from SAM,
our method provides a powerful and efficient solution for
reconstructing 3D open-vocabulary representation.

2) Open-vocabulary Feature Distillation: We propose a
novel and efficient open-vocabulary feature distillation method
that starts with enhancing each 3D Gaussian primitive with embedded open-vocabulary feature. As an explicit representation, C. Language-guided Robotic Manipulation
a 3D Gaussian field can be composed of millions of primitives.
We use the reconstructed feature field to conduct robotic
Directly incorporating high-dimensional CLIP features (over
manipulation. Given a language instruction, our method begins
500 dimensions) into all primitives will result in unacceptable
with employing open-vocabulary queries to locate the target
memory costs and computation time. Therefore, we compress
object. Subsequently, we render the depth and normals of 3D
the embedded open-vocabulary feature of Gaussian primitives
Gaussian primitives to obtain the object’s detailed geometry.
from high-dimension CLIP space to low-dimension latent space.
Then, a point cloud-based grasping module is used to generate
After initializing 3D Gaussian primitives with low-dimension
grasp poses and the rendered normal is used to filter out
latent feature l, we employ a feature rasterizer to render the
unfeasible ones. After manipulating objects, we quickly update
feature map L:
the scene using observations from fewer viewpoints.
i−1
1) Open-vocabulary Querying: As our reconstructed feature
X
Y
L(u) =
li αi
(1 − αj )
(2) field is aligned with natural language, we can locate the
i
j=1
object described by language instructions via open-vocabulary
querying. We first follow the approach of LERF [16] to compute
where li is the open-vocabulary feature embedding of ith 3D
the relevance score s for each textual query:
gaussian primitives and L(u) represents the rendered openexp(Ψ(L) · T q )
vocabulary feature embedding at pixel u.
(5)
s = min
To distill the 2D open-vocabulary feature to 3D field, we
i exp(Ψ(L) · T q ) + exp(Ψ(L) · Ticanon )
need to (1) recover the dimension of L to that of F and
where T q is the CLIP embedding of the text query and Ticanon
(2) minimize the feature distance between the recovered L
is a set of canonical phrase embeddings Ticanon selected from
and the F . However, high-dimensional vector computation
"object", "things", "stuff", and "texture".
for dense feature maps leads to a catastrophic increase in
As a result, for each textual query, we obtain a relevance
computation time and memory usage. To tackle this problem,
heatmap where the points with relevance scores below a prewe propose a contrastive-learning-based distillation strategy,
determined threshold will be filtered out. Thus, the remaining
as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Specifically, having instance-level
region forms a mask for predicting the queried object. After
segmentation masks extracted by SAM, we impose constraints
obtaining the mask of the queried object, we locate the object
for the consistency of each pixel’s rendered feature within the
with a bounding box and convex hull.
same mask. To ensure runtime efficiency, we randomly sample
2) Geometry Restruction: To obtain dense point cloud
a few pixel pairs within each mask and only minimize the
representations
of objects and surface normal which is closely
distance of latent features between pixels of per sampled pair.
related
to
robotic
grasping, we render depth and surface normal
The number of pairs for each mask is proportion to the mask’s
to
multiple
viewpoints.
area and the number of total pairs n is fixed. We calculate the
average feature distances between all pairs as contrastive loss, Depth rendering: Similar to the rendering of RGB, we compute
the depth value for each pixel using the rasterizer:
written as:
i−1
n
X
Y
1X
D(u) =
di αi
(1 − αj )
(6)
Lcontr. = 1 −
L(ui ) · L(vi )
(3)
n i=1
i
j=1

where D(u) indicates the rendered depth map at pixel u.
We use the depth map obtained from the depth camera for
the corresponding viewpoint to supervise the rendered depth
map where we calculate the L1 loss:
m

Ldepth =

1 X
|D̂(i) − D(i)|
m i=1

(7)

where D̂ is the depth map obtained from the depth camera
and m is the number of pixels with valid depth value.
Normal rendering: As surface normals are directional vectors
that should exhibit rotational equivariance, normals cannot
be rendered as semantic features. Therefore, we follow [43],
[44] that use the shortest axis direction of the 3D Gaussian
primitives to serve as surface normal. As a result, the normals
are geometric properties of Gaussian primitives, related to their
orientations. We render the normal map by using the rasterizer:
N(u) =

X
i

ni αi

i−1
Y

(1 − αj )

(8)

j=1

where N(u) indicates the rendered surface normal map at pixel
u and ni is the normal of the ith 3D Gaussian primitive.
The rendered normal map represents the per-pixel surface
normal in the robot base coordinate. We use a Sobel-like operator to compute the normals for each pixel in the acquired depth
map and transform the calculated normals from the camera
coordinate to the robot base coordinate. After normalizing all
normal maps to unit vectors, we supervise the rendered normals
within the valid depth region:

m 
2
1 X 
N̂(i) − N(i) + 1 − N̂(i) · N(i) (9)
Lnormal =
m i=1

highest score may not be the suitable one for stable grasp. Thus,
we explicitly utilize the force closure theory as a screening
mechanism. For each grasp pose proposal with two contact
points, we calculate the angle between the grasping line and
the surface normal of each contact point and get the sum of
two angles. If the sum of the two angles is less than or equal
to a pre-defined threshold θthre , we regard the grasp pose as a
feasible proposal, otherwise it is unfeasible, as shown in Fig. 2
(c). We choose the pose with the highest "grasping score" in
feasible proposals as the final grasp pose.
4) Gaussian Field Updating: As an explicit representation
composed of 3D Gaussian primitives, it is easy to operate
Gaussian primitives. Therefore, after manipulating an object,
we will operate all Gaussian primitives within this object’s
convex hull with the same rotation and translation, which can
be calculated from the transform of the end-effector of the
robot arm. After operating 3D Gaussian primitives to a new
position, we use fewer views and time to fine-tune 3D Gaussian
field to update the scene.
IV. E XPERIMENT
In this section, we first introduce the setup of the experimental environment. Next, we conduct experiments to validate
our proposed EFD module where we report both quantitative
results and qualitative results. Subsequently, we show the
results of geometry reconstruction and conduct ablation study to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed normal-guided
grasp. Finally, we conduct grasp-update-grasp experiments
on scenes to verify the effectiveness and efficiency of our
scene update module. These experiments fully demonstrate the
performance of our method in open-scene understanding and
language-guided grasping.

3) Feasible Grasp Pose Generation: After obtaining the A. Experimental Setup
localization and geometry of the object, we (1) employ a grasp
1) Scenes, Objects and Devices: We built a 140×70×30cm3
detection method to propose initial grasp poses and (2) utilize desktop scene with common objects in the kitchen including
our rendered normal to augment the grasp pose proposals various food and tableware as well as office supplies including
according to the force closure theory.
staplers, mouse and decorative ornaments. We use a UR5 robot
Grasp pose generation: In our work, we employ the Any- arm equipped with a ROBOTIQ gripper to execute robotic
Grasp [34], the state-of-the-art grasp detection network, which manipulation. We set up our system in 10 open desktop scenes
takes colorful point cloud as input and generates a set of with a total of 44 objects (40 are graspable) where we execute
collision-free grasp proposals for parallel two-finger grippers. language-guided manipulation 120 times. In terms of computing
Each grasp proposal is represented by grasp position, width, resources, we use an NVIDIA RTX-3090 GPU to reconstruct
height, depth and a grasping score. We generate the grasp- the feature field and reconstruct geometry. The reconstruction
pose proposals for the object queried by language with the process only requires approximately 6GB of memory in total.
following steps: (1) Re-project the rendered depth of the
2) Data Collection and Processing: We first use the robot
queried object from each viewpoint to produce a dense point arm equipped with a Realsense D455 to scan the desktop
cloud representation. (2) Combine the object’s point cloud scene from 16 viewpoints. At the same time, we will also
with the point cloud derived from 3D Gaussian primitives record the camera extrinsic parameter, calculated through the
because the derived point cloud depicts the localization and transformation of the end effector to the base. After obtaining
approximate shape of other objects, which is beneficial for images and depth maps, we re-project the depth map and
generating collision-free grasp poses. (3) Employ AnyGrasp to convert all re-projected points to the base coordinate. We
generate grasp poses, which are restricted in the aforementioned downsample the number of these points to about 300k to
bounding box, obtained from steps in III-C1.
initialize the 3D Gaussian primitives. The collected images are
Normal-guided grasp: Although AnyGrasp provides a "grasp- processed by SAM and CLIP to generate segmentation maps
ing score" for each grasp proposal, the grasp pose with the and open-vocabulary feature maps.

Image

SAM+CLIP

Image

SAM+CLIP

Image

Ours

LERF

Ours

LERF

LERF

‘Umbrella’

‘Wooden fork’

Image

SAM+CLIP

LERF

Ours

‘Camera model’

Image

Ours

LERF

‘Turkey’

Image

SAM+CLIP

Image

LERF

Ours

LERF

‘Roasted chicken wing’

SAM+CLIP

‘Fork’

SAM+CLIP

Ours

‘Fish’

SAM+CLIP

Image

Ours

LERF

SAM+CLIP

Ours

‘Banana’

Fig. 3. Relevance map of the given language instructions. Our method exhibits clearer segmentation boundaries compared to LERF, which can be used to
obtain more accurate localization. Compared with SAM + CLIP, our approach exhibits more consistent open-vocabulary features across multi-views. For
instance, in ’Roasted chicken wing’, the response of SAM + CLIP is the chicken wing and the fork while our method makes the correct response.

B. Results of Efficient Feature Distillation

TABLE I
Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION AND

We show both qualitative results and quantitative results to
LOCALIZATION ACCURACY ON OUR SCENARIOS
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed
Method
mIoU(%) ↑
Accuracy(%) ↑
Time per query (s) ↓
LSeg[45]
26.4
40.6
EFD module. Our baselines are Lseg [45] and LERF [16] (All
LERF*[16]
41.3
65.1
40.27
mention of LERF in our experiments includes an extra depth
Ours
58.2
87.5
0.22
supervision to ensure a fair comparison with our method.)
"*" represents LERF with an extra depth supervision
In qualitative results, we compare our method with SAM +
CLIP (our 2D sudo labels) and LERF and show the relevance
Besides, we test the query speed and report results in Table I.
map of each given language instruction. As shown in Fig. 3, the The metric is the time usage (s) per text query at a resolution
purple boxes demonstrate that the features extracted from SAM of 640 × 480. It can be seen that our method achieves an
and CLIP are not accurate such as the incomplete wooden fork approximate 180 × speedup over LERF. We also directly distill
in ’Wooden fork’ and the pot and turkey with similar semantic CLIP features into 3D Gaussian field, which takes over 70 GB
features in ’Turkey’. In comparison, our relevance map is more of memory, making it hard to be applied to robots.
accurate, proving that our reconstructed feature field solves the
problem of feature inconsistency across multiple views. Besides, C. Results of Geometry Reconstruction
compared with LERF, our method exhibits better segmentation
We show the visualization of our rendered depth and normal
boundaries. Therefore, our method can help robots reduce the compared with ground truth (scanned by D455 camera), as
ambiguity of object perception.
shown in Fig. 4. The black region represents the invalid value
We report the quantitative results of two tasks including of ground truth. It can be seen that the surface normal we
segmentation and localization. In the segmentation task, as rendered is smoother than the ground truth, as shown in red
described in III-C1 we filter out the region whose relevance boxes. Furthermore, even in areas where the ground truth is
score is below 0.85 to form a predicted segmentation map. invalid, we can still render accurate depth and surface normal.
We calculate the mIoU metric between predicted segmentation For example, in the third row, the camera can not capture the
maps and our manually annotated ground truth. In the localiza- depth of the silver eyeglass case in this view because of the
tion task, following LERF, given a language instruction, if the specular reflection of the case but our method renders accurate
point with the highest relevance score is in the target object, it depth and normal of it.
is a successful localization. We calculate the average accuracy
of all responses as the metrics. The results of segmentation and D. Effectiveness of Normal-guided Grasp
localization are shown in Table I where our method significantly
In this subsection, we aim to validate the effectiveness of
outperforms other approaches.
our proposed normal-guided grasp. We first give the qualitative

Initial Scene

After Updating

Image

GT Depth

Rendered Depth

GT Normal

Rendered Normal

Ground Truth

Fig. 4. Compared with scanned depth and surface normal, our rendered depth
and surface normal is smoother. Our method renders accurate depth and surface
normal even in areas where the ground truth is invalid.
TABLE II
G RASPING R ESULTS : R ESULTS ARE REPORTED ACROSS 40 DIFFERENT
OBJECTS OF 10 SCENARIOS . E ACH OBJECT IS GRASPED THREE TIMES .
Method
Grasping Success Rate (%)
LSeg + Depth[45]
26.7
LERF + AnyGrasp[16]
55.8
Ours w/o. Normal Filter
78.3
Ours w/ Normal Filter
85.0

result to validate that the surface normal can filter out unfeasible
grasp poses. As shown in Fig. 5, the original top-ranked
proposal (red) is filtered out as the angles between its grasping
line and surface normal of contact points are too large. In
contrast, the original second-ranked proposal is feasible. Thus,
we execute a grasp based on this pose.
Besides, we report the quantitative results of the grasping
success rate with and without the normal filter, as shown in
Table II. Leveraging the normal filter significantly increases the
success rate by 7.7%, further demonstrating the effectiveness
of our proposed normal-guided grasp.

RGB

Depth

Normal

Segmentation

Fig. 6. Results of scene update. We show the RGB, depth, normal, and
segmentation before and after the scene update based on the language query
"orange". As indicated by the yellow boxes, our scene updating successfully
moves the orange to the plate and restores the region that was previously
obscured by the orange. As indicated by the red boxes, the updated orange
still maintains accurate geometry and semantic features.
TABLE III
E FFIECIENCY COMPARISON BETWEEN LERF AND OUR METHOD .
Method
Viewpoints
Memory
Time
LERF [16]
16
15GB
30min
Ours
5
4GB
1min

1) Successful rate of manipulation: In this subsection, we
show the result of languaged-guided grasping where we tested
120 times on 40 objects. We compare our method with (1)
Lseg + AnyGrasp and (2) LERF + AnyGrasp. To obtain the
3D point cloud, we use the rendered depth to re-project the
segmentation masks of LERF and use scanned depth to reproject the segmentation masks of LSeg. We define a successful
grasp as stably picking up the corresponding object according
Right View
to the language instruction and raising it to a height of more
than 10cm over 3 seconds. The result is shown in Table II,
where our method far exceeds other methods in success rate.
2) Scene updating: To validate the effectiveness of our
Final Grasp Pose
proposed efficient scene updating, we execute an experiment
Left View
whose process is (1) picking up the object and placing it to
the target position according to the language instruction, (2)
capturing RGB-D images from 5 viewpoints to update the
scene, (3) executing another manipulation on this object. The
Surface Normal
Grasp Proposals
result is shown in Fig. 6, where our updated scene remains
Execution
high quality RGB, geometry and semantic features, proving
Fig. 5. Effectiveness of our proposed normal-guided grasp. The left column the effectiveness of the proposed scene updating. Besides, we
shows the top 5 grasp proposals provided by AnyGrasp. The redder the color,
also show the efficiency comparison between LERF and ours
the higher the grasping score. The middle column displays the surface normal
of the object, with purple arrows indicating the normal of the contact points. including viewpoint numbers, memory usage and reconstruction
The right column demonstrates the successful execution of grasping the knife
time for updating, as shown in Table IV-E2. Our scene update
utilizing the final grasp pose after filtering out unreasonable proposals.
capability makes the reconstructed scene more capable of
handling continuous grasping.
E. Results of Language-guided Manipulation
V. L IMITATION
In this subsection, we first give the result of language-guided
grasping. Then, we validate our proposed scene updating via
continuous language-guided picking and placing.

One limitation is that our reconstructed scene remains static.
Although we have proposed a scene-updating module to handle

continuous robotic grasping, we are unable to account for
unrecordable scene changes, such as objects shifting positions
caused by collisions or vibrations. Another limitation is that our
method fails to estimate the depth and normal of transparent
objects due to the lack of ground truth.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce GaussianGrasper, a novel
approach for open-world robotic grasping guided by natural
language instructions from RGB-D inputs. Taking multi-view
RGB-D images as input, our method efficiently reconstructs
consistent feature fields through our proposed EFD module.
The feature field enables the robot to understand the open world
and make precise localization based on language instructions.
Besides, we estimate the geometry and propose the normalguided grasp to augment the robotic grasping. Furthermore,
our scene can also be quickly updated to support continuous
grasping. Sufficient real-world experiments have demonstrated
the effectiveness of our method.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Lynch and P. Sermanet, “Language conditioned imitation learning
over unstructured data,” RSS, 2020.
[2] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Cliport: What and where pathways
for robotic manipulation,” in CoRL, 2022.
[3] X. Lin, J. So, S. Mahalingam, F. Liu, and P. Abbeel, “Spawnnet: Learning
generalizable visuomotor skills from pre-trained networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03567, 2023.
[4] P.-L. Guhur, S. Chen, R. G. Pinel, M. Tapaswi, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid,
“Instruction-driven history-aware policies for robotic manipulations,” in
CoRL, 2022.
[5] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, et al., “Segment anything,”
in ICCV, 2023.
[6] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., “Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision,” in ICML, 2021.
[7] M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. Jégou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski, and
A. Joulin, “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers,”
in ICCV, 2021.
[8] D. Z. Chen, A. X. Chang, and M. Nießner, “Scanrefer: 3d object
localization in rgb-d scans using natural language,” in ECCV, 2020.
[9] Z. Jiang, Y. Zhu, M. Svetlik, K. Fang, and Y. Zhu, “Synergies
between affordance and geometry: 6-dof grasp detection via implicit
representations,” RSS, 2021.
[10] S. Chen, R. G. Pinel, C. Schmid, and I. Laptev, “Polarnet: 3d point
clouds for language-guided robotic manipulation,” ArXiv, 2023.
[11] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox, “Perceiver-actor: A multi-task
transformer for robotic manipulation,” in CoRL, 2022.
[12] Y. Ze, G. Yan, Y.-H. Wu, A. Macaluso, Y. Ge, J. Ye, N. Hansen, L. E. Li,
and X. Wang, “Gnfactor: Multi-task real robot learning with generalizable
neural feature fields,” in CoRL, 2023.
[13] C. Zhong, Y. Zheng, Y. Zheng, H. Zhao, L. Yi, X. Mu, L. Wang, P. Li,
G. Zhou, C. Yang, X. Zhang, and J. Zhao, “3d implicit transporter for
temporally consistent keypoint discovery,” in ICCV, 2023.
[14] S. Kobayashi, E. Matsumoto, and V. Sitzmann, “Decomposing nerf for
editing via feature field distillation,” NeurIPS, 2022.
[15] V. Tschernezki, I. Laina, D. Larlus, and A. Vedaldi, “Neural feature
fusion fields: 3d distillation of self-supervised 2d image representations,”
in 3DV, 2022.
[16] J. Kerr, C. M. Kim, K. Goldberg, A. Kanazawa, and M. Tancik, “Lerf:
Language embedded radiance fields,” in ICCV, 2023.
[17] W. Shen, G. Yang, A. Yu, J. Wong, L. P. Kaelbling, and P. Isola, “Distilled
feature fields enable few-shot language-guided manipulation,” in CoRL,
2023.
[18] A. Rashid, S. Sharma, C. M. Kim, J. Kerr, L. Y. Chen, A. Kanazawa,
and K. Goldberg, “Language embedded radiance fields for zero-shot
task-oriented grasping,” in CoRL, 2023.

[19] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkühler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 2023.
[20] J. Redmon and A. Angelova, “Real-time grasp detection using convolutional neural networks,” in ICRA, 2015.
[21] J. Mahler, J. Liang, S. Niyaz, M. Laskey, R. Doan, X. Liu, J. A. Ojea,
and K. Goldberg, “Dex-net 2.0: Deep learning to plan robust grasps with
synthetic point clouds and analytic grasp metrics,” RSS, 2017.
[22] D. Guo, F. Sun, H. Liu, T. Kong, B. Fang, and N. Xi, “A hybrid deep
architecture for robotic grasp detection,” in ICRA, 2017.
[23] X. Zhou, X. Lan, H. Zhang, Z. Tian, Y. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “Fully
convolutional grasp detection network with oriented anchor box,” in
IROS, 2018.
[24] Y. Zheng, Q. Wang, C. Zhong, H. Liang, Z. Han, and Y. Zheng,
“Enhancing daily life through an interactive desktop robotics system,” in
CICAI, 2023.
[25] X. Zhu, L. Sun, Y. Fan, and M. Tomizuka, “6-dof contrastive grasp
proposal network,” in ICRA, 2021.
[26] G. Zhai, D. Huang, S.-C. Wu, H. Jung, Y. Di, F. Manhardt, F. Tombari,
N. Navab, and B. Busam, “Monograspnet: 6-dof grasping with a single
rgb image,” in ICRA, 2023.
[27] H. Liang, X. Ma, S. Li, M. Görner, S. Tang, B. Fang, F. Sun, and
J. Zhang, “Pointnetgpd: Detecting grasp configurations from point sets,”
in ICRA, 2019.
[28] C. Wu, J. Chen, Q. Cao, J. Zhang, Y. Tai, L. Sun, and K. Jia, “Grasp
proposal networks: An end-to-end solution for visual learning of robotic
grasps,” NeurIPS, 2020.
[29] M. Sundermeyer, A. Mousavian, R. Triebel, and D. Fox, “Contactgraspnet: Efficient 6-dof grasp generation in cluttered scenes,” in ICRA,
2021.
[30] B. Zhao, H. Zhang, X. Lan, H. Wang, Z. Tian, and N. Zheng, “Regnet:
Region-based grasp network for end-to-end grasp detection in point
clouds,” in ICRA, 2021.
[31] A. Alliegro, M. Rudorfer, F. Frattin, A. Leonardis, and T. Tommasi,
“End-to-end learning to grasp via sampling from object point clouds,”
RA-L, 2022.
[32] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu, “Graspnet-1billion: A largescale benchmark for general object grasping,” in CVPR, 2020.
[33] H. Fang, H.-S. Fang, S. Xu, and C. Lu, “Transcg: A large-scale realworld dataset for transparent object depth completion and a grasping
baseline,” RA-L, 2022.
[34] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, H. Fang, M. Gou, J. Liu, H. Yan, W. Liu, Y. Xie,
and C. Lu, “Anygrasp: Robust and efficient grasp perception in spatial
and temporal domains,” T-RO, 2023.
[35] A. Ten Pas and R. Platt, “Using geometry to detect grasp poses in 3d
point clouds,” Robotics Research: Volume 1, 2018.
[36] H.-Y. F. Tung, R. Cheng, and K. Fragkiadaki, “Learning spatial common
sense with geometry-aware recurrent networks,” in CVPR, 2019.
[37] H.-Y. F. Tung, Z. Xian, M. Prabhudesai, S. Lal, and K. Fragkiadaki,
“3d-oes: Viewpoint-invariant object-factorized environment simulators,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06464, 2020.
[38] S. Peng, K. Genova, C. Jiang, A. Tagliasacchi, M. Pollefeys,
T. Funkhouser, et al., “Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open
vocabularies,” in CVPR, 2023.
[39] C. Wang, M. Chai, M. He, D. Chen, and J. Liao, “Clip-nerf: Text-andimage driven manipulation of neural radiance fields,” in CVPR, 2022.
[40] Q. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Deng, Y. You, H. Dong, Y. Zhu, and L. Guibas,
“Sparsedff: Sparse-view feature distillation for one-shot dexterous manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16838, 2023.
[41] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in CVPR, 2016.
[42] A. Neubeck and L. Van Gool, “Efficient non-maximum suppression,” in
ICPR, 2006.
[43] Y. Jiang, J. Tu, Y. Liu, X. Gao, X. Long, W. Wang, and Y. Ma,
“Gaussianshader: 3d gaussian splatting with shading functions for
reflective surfaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17977, 2023.
[44] X. Long, Y. Zheng, Y. Zheng, B. Tian, C. Lin, L. Liu, H. Zhao,
G. Zhou, and W. Wang, “Adaptive surface normal constraint for geometric
estimation from monocular images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05869,
2024.
[45] B. Li, K. Q. Weinberger, S. Belongie, V. Koltun, and R. Ranftl,
“Language-driven semantic segmentation,” in ICLR, 2022.

