arXiv:2312.00732v2 [cs.CV] 8 Jul 2024

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything
in 3D Scenes
Mingqiao Ye, Martin Danelljan, Fisher Yu, and Lei Ke ♠
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

(a) Rendered Views
(original scene)

(b) Rendered Anything Masks

(c) 3D Object Removal
(red circle)

(d) 3D Object Inpainting
(green circle)

(e) 3D Object Scene Recomposition
(exchange red and green circle,
colorize purple circle)

Fig. 1: Our Gaussian Grouping jointly reconstructs (column a) and segments (column
b) anything in full open-world 3D scenes, with fine-grained instance and stuff level
modeling. This enables versatile scene editing applications, such as 3D object removal
(column c), 3D object inpainting (column d, which first removes the 3D object and
then inpaints the holes) and scene re-composition and object colorization (column e).
Since the segmentation information is encapsulated in the 3D Gaussians, editing tasks
such as 3D object removal, colorization and object location exchange can be performed
directly w/o training, while inpainting only requires minutes of fine-tuning.
Abstract. The recent Gaussian Splatting achieves high-quality and realtime novel-view synthesis of the 3D scenes. However, it is solely concentrated on the appearance and geometry modeling, while lacking in
fine-grained object-level scene understanding. To address this issue, we
propose Gaussian Grouping, which extends Gaussian Splatting to jointly
reconstruct and segment anything in open-world 3D scenes. We augment
each Gaussian with a compact Identity Encoding, allowing the Gaussians
to be grouped according to their object instance or stuff membership in
the 3D scene. Instead of resorting to expensive 3D labels, we supervise
the Identity Encodings during the differentiable rendering by leveraging
the 2D mask predictions by Segment Anything Model (SAM), along with
introduced 3D spatial consistency regularization. Compared to the implicit NeRF representation, we show that the discrete and grouped 3D
Gaussians can reconstruct, segment and edit anything in 3D with high
visual quality, fine granularity and efficiency. Based on Gaussian Grouping, we further propose a local Gaussian Editing scheme, which shows
♠

Project Lead

2

M. Ye et al.
efficacy in versatile scene editing applications, including 3D object removal, inpainting, colorization, style transfer and scene recomposition.
Our code and models are at github.com/lkeab/gaussian-grouping.
Keywords: 3D Segment Anything · Scene Editing · Gaussian Splatting

1

Introduction

Open-world 3D scene understanding is an essential challenge, with far-reaching
implications for robotics, AR / VR, and autonomous driving. Given a set of
posed RGB images, our goal is to learn an effective 3D representation that
jointly reconstructs and segments anything in the 3D scene. The representation
should easily support a wide range of downstream scene editing applications.
For example, in Figure 1, the 3D object of the scene can be easily removed or
inpainted, and the scene can be recomposed by exchanging object locations.
While there has been remarkable progress in 2D scene understanding brought
by SAM and its variants [14, 17, 64], their extension to 3D has been constrained.
This is mostly due to the availability and the labor-intensive process of creating
3D scene datasets. Existing methods [8, 42] rely on manually-labeled datasets,
which are both costly and limited in scope, or require accurately scanned point
clouds [37, 47] as input. This hinders the development of the 3D scene understanding methods that can quickly generalize across various real-world scenes.
By taking multi-view captures, existing NeRF-based methods [16, 19, 28, 44]
lift 2D masks or distill CLIP [39] / DINO [3] features via neural fields rendering. However, due to the implicit and continuous representation of NeRF, these
methods require expensive random sampling and are computationally intensive
to optimize. Further, it is hard to directly adjust NeRF-based approaches for the
downstream local editing tasks [19], because the learned neural networks, such
as MLPs, cannot decompose each part or module in the 3D scene easily. Several
methods [4, 43] combine NeRF or stable-diffusion [41] with the masks of SAM,
but they only focus on a single object.
Alternative to NeRFs, the recently emerged 3D Gaussian Splatting [15] has
shown impressive reconstruction quality with high training and rendering efficiency. It represents the 3D scene with an array of colored and explicit 3D
Gaussians, which are rendered into camera views for novel view synthesis. Nevertheless, Gaussian Splatting does not model object instances or semantic understanding. To achieve fine-grained scene understanding, we extend this approach
beyond merely capturing the scene’s appearance and geometry to include the
individual objects and elements that constitute the 3D environments.
We propose Gaussian Grouping, which represents the whole 3D scene with a
set of grouped 3D Gaussians. By inputting multi-view captures and the corresponding automatically generated masks by SAM, our method learns a discrete
and grouped 3D representation for reconstructing and segmenting anything in
the 3D scene. Gaussian Grouping inherits SAM’s strong zero-shot 2D scene understanding capability and extends it to the 3D space by producing consistent
novel view synthesis and segmentation.

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

3

To this end, instead of solely modeling the scene appearance and geometry, our approach also captures the identity of each Gaussian of the 3D scene by
grouping. A new property, our Identity Encoding, is augmented to each Gaussian.
The Identity Encoding is a compact and low-dimensional learnable embedding.
To leverage the segmentation supervision in 2D, Identity Encoding is trained via
differentiable Gaussian rendering, where the encoding vectors of various Gaussians are splatted onto the 2D rendering view. Then, we take the 2D rendered
identity features and employ an extra linear layer to classify these splatted embeddings on each 2D location for identity classification.
To further boost the grouping accuracy, besides the standard cross-entropy
loss for identity classification, we also introduce an un-supervised 3D Regularization Loss by leveraging 3D spatial consistency. The loss enforces the Identity
Encodings of the top K-nearest 3D Gaussians to be close in their feature distance. We find it helps Gaussians inside the 3D object or heavily occluded to be
supervised during training more sufficiently.
We highlight the advantages of Gaussian Grouping not only by providing
high visual quality and fast training, but also through its downstream scene
editing applications brought by our dense 3D segmentation. Since our model
captures the 3D scenes as compositional structures, each group of 3D Gaussians
operates independently, allowing for parts to be fully decoupled or separated.
This decomposition is crucial in scenarios where individual components need to
be identified, manipulated, or replaced w/o disrupting the entire scene structure.
Our contribution can be summarized as follows:
1. We introduce Gaussian Grouping, the first 3D Gaussian Splatting-based segmentation framework that lifts knowledge of SAM to 3D scene anything
zero-shot segmentation without the need for 3D mask labels.
2. Gaussian Grouping supports various downstream tasks with our proposed
Local Gaussian Editing scheme. Individual components are identified, manipulated, or replaced without disrupting the entire scene structure. By the
grouped 3D Gaussians, we show extensive 3D scene editing cases, such as
3D scene re-composition, object inpainting, object removal and object style
transfer, with both impressive visual effect and fine granularity.
3. Our training and rendering processes are swift, ensuring compliance with
real-time operational requirements.

2

Related Works

3D Gaussian Models 3D Gaussian Splatting [15] has recently emerged as a
powerful approach to reconstruct 3D scenes via real-time radiance field rendering. Several follow-up methods [29, 58, 59] extend it to dynamic 3D scenes by
tracking of all dense scene elements [29] or deformation field modeling [54, 59].
Another stream of works [6, 48, 60] focuses on the 3D content creation, which
combines Gaussian Splatting with diffusion-based models and shows high-quality
generation results. However, none of the existing Gaussian Splatting works enables object / stuff-level or semantic understanding of the 3D scene. Our Gaussian Grouping extends Gaussian Splatting from pure scene appearance and ge-

4

M. Ye et al.

ometry modeling to also support open-world and fine-grained scene understanding. We show that the grouped 3D Gaussians is an effective and flexible 3D
representation in supporting a series of downstream scene editing applications.
Radiance-based Open World Scene Understanding Existing semantic
scene modeling approaches combined with radiance fields are NeRF-based [31,
33, 66]. Semantic-NeRF [67] initiated the incorporation of semantic information
into NeRFs and facilitated the generation of semantic masks from novel views.
Building upon it, subsequent research focusing on in-domain scene modeling,
has expanded the scope by introducing instance modeling [11, 22, 44, 52] or encoding visual features [19, 40, 49–51] that support semantic delineation. Unlike
our approach, most of these methods are designed for in-domain scene modeling
and cannot generalize to open-world scenarios.
By distilling 2D features such as CLIP [39] or DINO [3], Distilled Feature
Fields [19] explores embedding pixel-aligned feature vectors, and LERF [16]
learns language field to help open-world 3D semantics. In contrast to our work,
these open-world approaches are only limited in semantic segmentation (hard
to separate similar objects of the same category) and cannot produce very accurate segmentation masks as shown in our experiment. To our knowledge, we
propose the first Gaussian-based method to tackle open-world 3D scene understanding, where we show the advantages compared to existing NeRF-based
approaches [16, 19, 44] in segmentation quality, efficiency and good extension to
downstream scene editing applications.
SAM in 3D Segment Anything Model (SAM) [17] was released as a foundational vision model for zero-shot 2D segmentation. Several works lift SAM’s 2D
masks to 3D segmentation via NeRF [4,5] or 3D point cloud [57]. However, these
NeRF-based approaches only focus on a single / few objects of the 3D scene,
while our Gaussian Grouping operates in automatic everything mode to attain
the holistic understanding of each instance / stuff of the full scene.
Radiance-based Scene Editing Manipulating 3D scenes via a radiance field
is challenging. For existing NeRF-based scene editing / manipulation works [13,
25, 27, 55, 63], Clip-NeRF [53], Object-NeRF [56], and LaTeRF [35] design approaches to change and complete objects represented by NeRFs; however, their
application scenario is limited to simple objects, rather than scenes with significant clutter and texture. Some other works specify bounding boxes [36, 62], to
allow flexible compositing of various objects [65] or combining with physical simulation [24]. Most recently, 3D object inpainting is studied in SPIn-NeRF [34]
and language-based scene editing is proposed in [12]. Compared to them, we
apply our Gaussian Grouping to versatile scene editing tasks, and show benefits
brought by the fine-grained scene modeling, where multiple scene editings can be
easily superimposed on the same image. The design of Local Gaussian Editing
makes the whole training / editing process both simple and efficient.

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

3

5

Method

Our work aims to build an expressive 3D scene representation, which not only
models appearance and geometry, but also captures every instance and stuff
identity of the scene. We design our method based on the recent 3D Gaussian
Splatting [15], and extend it from pure 3D reconstruction to fine-grained scene
understanding. Our approach, called Gaussian Grouping, is capable of: 1) modeling each 3D part of the scene with appearance, geometry together with their
mask identities; 2) fully decomposing the 3D scene into discrete groups, e.g. representing different object instances to enable editing; 3) allowing for fast training
and rendering, while not diluting the original 3D reconstruction quality.
Gaussian Grouping effectively leverages the dense 2D mask proposals of
SAM, and lifts them to segment anything in the 3D scene via radiance fields
rendering. In Sec 3.1, we first briefly review the 3D Gaussian Splatting method
on radiance field rendering. We then detail the input data pre-processing steps
and further describe the proposed Gaussian Grouping in Section 3.2. With the
constructed 3D representation, finally, we show its advantages in downstream
scene editing tasks by the efficient Local Gaussian Editing in Section 3.3.
3.1

Preliminaries: 3D Gaussian Splatting

Gaussian Splatting, as introduced by [15], encapsulates 3D scene information using a suite of 3D colored Gaussians. This technique has established its effectiveness in the reconstruction tasks, exhibiting high inference speeds and remarkable
quality of reconstruction within timeframes on par with those of NeRF. Yet, its
potential in scene understanding has not been thoroughly investigated. Our research reveals that 3D Gaussians hold considerable promise for the open-world
and complex 3D scene understanding.
To represent the scene, each Gaussian’s property is characterized by a centroid \protect \mathbf  {p} = \{x, y, z\} \in \mathbb {R}^3 , a 3D size \protect \mathbf  {s} \in \mathbb {R}^3 in standard deviations, and a rotational quaternion \protect \mathbf  {q} \in \mathbb {R}^4 . To allow fast α-blending for rendering, an opacity
value \alpha \in \mathbb {R} and a color vector \protect \mathbf  {c} are represented in the three degrees of spherical
harmonics (SH) coefficients. These adjustable parameters are collectively symbolized by S_{\Theta _i} , where S_{\Theta _i} = \{\mathbf {p}_i, \mathbf {s}_i, \mathbf {q}_i, \alpha _i, \mathbf {c}_i\} represents the set of parameters
for the i-th Gaussian. Gaussian Splatting projects these 3D Gaussians onto the
2D image plane and implement differentiable rendering for each pixel.
3.2

3D Gaussian Grouping

In this section, we describe the design of our Gaussian Grouping. To enable
3D Gaussians for fine-grained scene understanding, our key insight is that we
preserve all attributes of the Gaussians (such as their position, color, opacity, and
size) in their original setting, but add new Identity Encoding parameters (similar
to the format of color modeling). This allows each Gaussian to be assigned to
its represented instances or stuff in the 3D scene.

6

M. Ye et al.
(a) Multi-view Captures with
Anything Masks by SAM
View 1

View 2

(b) Consistent IDs for Anything
Coherent Masks across Views
View 1

(c) Grouping via Rendering

View 2

Gradient
Spatial
Neighbors

View 3

View 𝑁

View 3

Projection at
Camera View 𝑁

View 𝑁

3D Regularization
Loss 𝐿#$
Identity Features 𝐸*$

Gradient

3D Gaussians with Identity Encodings

Mask Association

2D Identity Loss 𝐿%$

Gradient

Fig. 2: The method pipeline of our Gaussian Grouping contains three main steps:
(a) We first prepare the input by deploying SAM to automatically generate masks
in everything mode for each view independently. (b) Then, to obtain the consistent
mask IDs across training views, we take a universal temporal propagation model [7]
to associate the mask labels and generate a coherent multi-view segmentation. (c)
With the prepared training input, we jointly learn all properties of the 3D Gaussians,
including their group Identity Encoding, by differentiable rendering. Our encoding is
supervised by the 2D Identity Loss, leveraging the coherent segmentation views, and
a 3D Regularization loss. We use color the denote object IDs across frames for input
views. We omit the rendering process for other Gaussian parameters and the density
control part for simplicity, as it is inherited from [15].

Algorithm 1 Gaussian Grouping
p ← SfM Points
\triangleright  3D Positions
m = (m1 , m2 , . . . , mK ) ← SAM
\triangleright  SAM’s Masks at Various K Views
(M̂1 , M̂2 , . . . , M̂K ) ← Zero-shot Tracking(m)
\triangleright  Multi-view Associated Masks
\triangleright  Covariances, Opacities, Colors, Identity Encodings
s, α, c, e ← InitAttributes()
i←0
\triangleright  Iteration Count
while not converged do
ˆ M̂ ← SampleTrainingView()
\triangleright  Camera View V , Image and Mask
V, I,
\triangleright  Rendered Image and Identity Encoding
I, Eid ← Rasterize(p, s, a, c, e ,V )
ˆ
Limage ← L(I, I)
\triangleright  Original Image Rendering Loss
Lid ← λ2d L2d (Eid , M̂ ) + λ3d L3d (e)
\triangleright  Identity Grouping Loss, Eq. 3
L ← Limage + Lid
\triangleright  Total Loss
p, s, a, c, e ← Adam(∇L)
\triangleright  Backprop & Step
if IsRefinementIteration(i) then
for all J Gaussians (pj , sj , αj , cj , ej ) in (p, s, a, c, e) do
if α < ϵ or IsTooLarge(pj , sj ) then
\triangleright  Pruning
RemoveGaussian()
end if
if ∇p L > τp then
\triangleright  Densification
if ∥S∥ > τS then
\triangleright  Over-reconstruction
SplitGaussian(pj , sj , αj , cj , ej )
else
\triangleright  Under-reconstruction
CloneGaussian(pj , sj , αj , cj , ej )
end if
end if
end for
end if
i←i+1
end while

The process of Gaussian Grouping is illustrated in Figure 2. We outline the
pseudocode for our Gaussian Grouping in Algorithm 1, where we highlight the
introduced core components in both red and bold texts.

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

7

(a) 2D Image and Mask Input To prepare the input for Gaussian Grouping,
in Figure 2(a), we first deploy SAM to automatically generate masks for each
image of the multi-view collection. The 2D masks are individually produced per
image. Then, to assign each 2D mask a unique ID in the 3D scene, we need to
associate the masks of the same identity across different views and obtain the
total number K of instances / stuff in the 3D scene.
(b) Identity Consistency across Views Instead of resorting to the costbased linear assignment [44] during training, we treat the multi-view images of
a 3D scene as a video sequence with gradually changing views. To achieve the
2D mask consistency across views, we employ a well-trained zero-shot tracker [7]
to propagate and associate masks. This also provides the total number of mask
identities in the 3D scene. We visualize associated 2D mask labels in Figure 2(b).
Compared to the cost-based linear assignment proposed in [44], we find it simplifies the training difficulty while avoiding repeatedly computing the matching
relation in each rendering iteration, resulting in over 60× speeding up. It also
achieves better performance than the cost-based linear assignment, especially
under the dense and overlapping masks by SAM. Besides, we show the robustness of our 3D masks association in Figure 5, where the 2D associated masks [7]
from video contain obvious errors.
(c) 3D Gaussian Rendering and Grouping To generate 3D-consistent mask
identities across views of the scene, we propose to group 3D Gaussians belonging
to the same instance / stuff. In addition to the existing Gaussian properties, we
introduce a new parameter, i.e., Identity Encoding, to each Gaussian. The Identity Encoding is a learnable and compact vector of length 16, which we find is
sufficient to distinguish the different objects / parts in the scene with computation efficiency. During training, similar to Spherical Harmonic (SH) coefficients
representing the color of each Gaussian, we optimize the introduced Identity Encoding vector to represent its instance ID of the scene. Note that different from
the view-dependent appearance modeling of the scene, the instance ID is consistent across various rendering views. Thus, we set the SH degree of the Identity
Encoding to 0, to only model its direct-current component. Unlike NeRF-based
methods [16,19,44] designing extra semantic MLP layers, the Identity Encoding
serves as the learnable property for each Gaussian to group the 3D scene.
To optimize the introduced Identity Encoding of each Gaussian, in Figure 2(c), we render these encoded identity vectors into 2D images in a differentiable manner. We take the differentiable 3D Gaussian renderer from [15] and
treat the rendering process similar to the color (SH coefficients) optimization
in [15].
3D Gaussian splatting adopts neural point-based α′ -rendering [20,21], where
the influence weight α′ of each Gaussian can be evaluated in 2D for each pixel.
Following [15], the influence of all Gaussians on a single pixel location is computed by sorting the Gaussians in depth order and blending N ordered points
overlapping the pixels [30, 33]:
  \label {eq:2d_id} E_{\text {id}} = \sum _{i \in \mathcal {N}} e_i \alpha '_i \prod _{j=1}^{i-1} (1 - \alpha '_j) 

(1)

8

M. Ye et al.

where the final rendered 2D mask identity feature Eid for each pixel is a weighted
sum over the Identity Encoding ei of length 16 for each Gaussian, weighted by
the Gaussian’s influence factor αi′ on that pixel. Refer to [61], we compute αi′
by measuring a 2D Gaussian with covariance Σ 2D multiplied with a learned
per-point opacity αi , and
  \Sigma ^{\textrm {2D}} = J W \Sigma ^{\textrm {3D}} W^T J^T 

(2)

where Σ 3D is the 3D covariance matrix, Σ 2D is the splatted 2D version [68]. J
is the Jacobian of the affine approximation of the 3D-2D projection, and W is
the world-to-camera transformation matrix.

(d) Grouping Loss After associating 2D instance labels across each training
view, suppose there are K masks in total in the 3D scene. To group each 3D
Gaussian by the instance /stuff mask identities, we design the grouping loss Lid
for updating the Identity Encoding of Gaussians with two components:
1. 2D Identity Loss: Since the mask identity labels are in 2D, instead
of directly supervising the Identity Encoding ei of the 3D Gaussians. Given
the rendered 2D features Eid in Eq. 1 as input, we first add a linear layer f
to recover its feature dimension back to K and then take softmax (f (Eid )) for
identity classification, where K is the total number of masks in the 3D scene.
We adopt a standard cross-entropy loss L2d for K categories classification.
2. 3D Regularization Loss: To further boost the grouping accuracy of
Gaussians, besides the standard cross-entropy loss for indirect 2D supervision,
we also introduce an unsupervised 3D Regularization Loss to directly regularize
the learning of Identity Encoding ei . 3D Regularization Loss leverages the 3D
spatial consistency, which enforces the Identity Encodings of the top k-nearest
3D Gaussians to be close in their feature distance. This allows the 3D Gaussians
inside the 3D object, or heavily occluded (not visible in nearly all training views)
during the point-based rendering (Eq. 1) to be supervised more sufficiently. In
Eq. 3, we denote F as softmax operation combined after linear layer f (shared
in computing the 2D Identity loss). We formalize the KL divergence loss with m
sampling points as,

  \label {eq:reg_3d} \mathcal {L}_\text {3d} = \frac {1}{m} \sum _{j=1}^{m} D_{\text {kl}}(P || Q) = \frac {1}{mk} \sum _{j=1}^{m}\sum _{i=1}^{k} F(e_j) \log \left (\frac {F(e_j)}{F(e'_i)}\right ) 

(3)

where P contains the sampled Identity Encoding e of a 3D Gaussian, while the
set Q = {e′1 , e′2 , ..., e′k } consists of its k nearest neighbors in 3D Euclidean space.
We omit the softmax operation combined after linear layer f for simplicity.
Combined with the conventional 3D Gaussian Reconstruction Loss Lrec on
image rendering [15], the total loss Lrender for fully end-to-end training is
  \mathcal {L}_\text {render} = \mathcal {L}_\text {rec} + \mathcal {L}_\text {id} = \mathcal {L}_\text {rec} + \lambda _\text {2d}\mathcal {L}_\text {2d} + \lambda _\text {3d}\mathcal {L}_\text {3d} 

(4)

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes
ID = 1

Gaussian Operation List

ID = n

Task 1. 3D Object Removal

ID = 0

9

Delete Gaussians Groups

Task 2. 3D Object Inpainting

Delete + Add new Gaussians

Task 3. 3D Object Colorization

Change group color (SH)

Task 4. 3D Object Style Transfer

Fine-tuning group color (SH)

Task 5. 3D Scene Re-composition

Exchange group locations.

ID = 2

3D Gaussian Groups

More Tasks

Fig. 3: The grouped 3D Gaussians after training, where each group represents a specific
instance / stuff of the 3D scene and can be fully decoupled. Our representation is
efficient to support versatile downstream scene editing applications, where we design
a Gaussian Operation List consisting of simple operations like group deletion, group
addition, finetuning Spherical Harmonic (SH) and exchanging 3D center locations.

3.3

Gaussian Grouping for Scene Editing

After the 3D Gaussian field training and grouping (Sec 3.2), as in Figure 3, we
represent the whole 3D scene with a set of grouped 3D Gaussians. To perform
various downstream local scene editing tasks, we propose efficient Local Gaussian
Editing. Thanks to the decoupled scene representation, instead of fine-tuning all
3D Gaussians, we freeze the properties for most of the well-trained Gaussians
and only adjust a small part of existing or newly added 3D Gaussians relevant
to the editing targets. For 3D object removal, we simply delete the 3D Gaussians
of the editing target. For 3D scene re-composition, we exchange the 3D location
between two Gaussian groups. These two editing applications are direct with
no parameter tuning. For 3D object inpainting, we first delete the relevant 3D
Gaussians and then add a small number of new Gaussians to be supervised by the
2D inpainting results by LaMa [46] during rendering. For 3D object colorization,
we only tune the color (SH) parameters of the corresponding Gaussian group to
preserve the learned 3D scene geometry. For 3D object style transfer, we further
unfreeze the 3D positions and sizes to achieve more realistic results.
Our local Gaussian editing scheme is time-efficient, as shown in our experiment. Because of our fine-grained mask modeling, it also supports multiple
concurrent local editings without interfering with each other or re-training the
whole global 3D scene representation with new editing operations. Compared to
NeRF-based approaches [12,19,34], we also provide extensive visual comparisons
for scene editing cases and discussion on mask granularity in the Supp. file.

4

Experiments

4.1

Dataset and Experiment Setup

Datasets To measure segmentation or fine-grained localization accuracy in
open-world scene, we evolve the existing LERF-Localization [16] evaluation dataset
and propose the LERF-Mask dataset, where we manually annotate three scenes
from LERF-Localization with accurate masks instead of using coarse bounding
boxes. For each 3D scene, we provide 7.7 text queries with corresponding GT

10

M. Ye et al.
Input Views

GT Image

Rendered Image
The Mask Labels
of DEVA

Rendered Mask
Cost-based Linear Assignment
(2K Iterations,
training time: > 1 hour)

Our Zero-shot Mask Association
(2K Iterations, training time:
1.3min), ID embed dim 32

Our Zero-shot Mask Association
(2K Iterations, training time: 1
min), ID embed dim 16

Fig. 4: Ablation on the Identity Consistency across views, where we treat
multi-view images as a video and associate the mask labels to generate coherent segmentation labels [7] for training. We founding using cost-based linear
assignment [44] leads to slower training
and inferior testing performance in both
reconstruction and segmentation.

Our Rendered
Mask with
Error Correction

Fig. 5: Robustness to input masks errors
on Mip-NeRF 360 [1]. In the 2nd and 3rd
columns (middle two views), SAM + DEVA
fails to segment and associate the chair across
frames. However, owing to the shared 3D
Gaussian representation during reconstruction, Gaussian Grouping successfully corrects
the error in mask labels and segments the
black chair during the multi-view rendering.

mask labels on average. We also provide 3D panoptic segmentation results on
Replica [45] and ScanNet [8] dataset. More details are in the Supp. file
To evaluate the reconstruction quality, we tested our Gaussian Grouping on
7 of full 9 sets of scenes presented in Mip-NeRF 360 [1], where the flowers and
treehill are skipped due to the non-public access right. We also take diverse 3D
scene cases from LLFF [32], Tanks & Temples [18] and Instruct-NeRF2NeRF [12]
for visual comparison on scene editing.
Implementation Details We implement Gaussian Grouping based on Gaussian Splatting [15]. We add a 16-dimension identity encoding to each Gaussian
and implement forward and backward cuda rasterization similar to the RGB
feature. The output classification linear layer has 16 input and 256 output channels. In training, λ2d = 1.0 and λ2d = 2.0. We use the Adam optimizer for both
Gaussians and the linear layer, with a learning rate of 2.5e-3 for identity encoding and 5e-4 for the linear layer. For 3D regularization loss, we choose k = 5 and
m = 1000. All datasets are trained for 30K iterations on one A100 GPU. Refer
to our Supp. file for more details on scene editing and SAM’s mask granularity.
4.2

Ablation Experiments

Ablation on Mask Cross-view Association To study the effect of cross-view
masks association [7] for input preparation, we replace the associated masks input to the individual masks predicted by SAM per image in Gaussian Grouping.
We take the cost-based linear assignment strategy proposed in [44], and perform
the visual comparison on rendering results in Figure 4. The linear assignment
not only heavily slows down the whole training due to the assignment computation in each iteration, but also produces noisy mask predictions. This is owing
to the large gradients brought by the unstable cost-based liner assignment, especially at the initial training stage of the network, where masks prediction is
nearly random. For 2K training iteration, linear assignment requires 1 hour but

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes
Table 1: Influence of Identity Encoding on Mip-NeRF
360 [1] dataset with its 7 public scenes. The joint training of the introduced Identity Encodings does not hurt
the original Gaussian reconstruction quality.
Model
Scene Seg Scene Edit PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ FPS
Baseline: Gaussian Splatting [15]
28.69 0.870 0.182 ∼200
Gaussian Grouping
✓
✓
28.43 0.863 0.189 ∼170

11

Table 2: Ablation of K of 3D
Regularization Loss on the 3D
object removal. RAcc: Object
Removal Accuracy.
Model Gaussian Splatting

Gaussian Grouping
K=0 K=1 k=2 K=5 K=10

PSNR
RAcc

30.51 30.62 30.61 30.72 30.62
41.2% 40.5% 67.5% 76.6% 77.8%

30.32
N/A

Rendered
Image

K=0

K=1

K=5

K=10

K=5 + Post process

Fig. 6: Visual ablation of K in the 3D Regularization Loss on object removal editing
of MipNeRF360. We remove Gaussians classified as lego with various K. We compute
the convex hull of the removed 3D Gaussian points as the post process.

our associated mask input only requires 1 minute. Also, we compare the scene
render reconstruction quality in Figure 4, where the appearance details of the
rope attached to the ceiling are much better preserved by our method.
Masks Association Errors Correction and Robustness Gaussian Grouping can also correct the 2D segmentation errors produced by DEVA, as shown
in Figure 5. Even taking the training input with partial 2D mask labels lost by
tracking, Gaussian Grouping is robust in 3D association and can retrieve them
based on the shared 3D Gaussian representation across different views.
Influence of the Identity Encoding In Table 1, we study the influence of our
introduced Identity Encoding on original Gaussian Splatting’s 3D reconstruction
performance and speed. The performance of Gaussian Grouping is on par with
the original Gaussian Splatting method with negligible decrease, but it allows
anything in the whole 3D scene to be segmented. By Identity Encoding, we
lift the 2D zero-shot segmentation of SAM to the 3D open world. Further, the
grouped 3D Gaussians support a wide range of downstream editing tasks. We
simply train all model components in an end-to-end manner jointly. This is
different from Panoptic Lifting [22] which requires to block gradients from the
segmentation branch back to the reconstruction branch.
Ablation on Identity Encoding Dimension We study the impact of dimension for our Identity Encoding in Figure 4. To keep the training efficiency, we set
the dimension of Identity Encoding to only 16 because it not only shows a good
segmentation separation between objects but also keeps the training efficiency.
Doubling the dimension to 32 does not bring a better reconstruction quality
compared to 16 but make training 1.3 times slower.
Ablation of 3D Regularization Loss We perform ablation of K in our 3D
Regularization Loss on the Kitchen dataset of Mip-NeRF 360 [1] to select K. As
in Fig. 6 and Table 2, K = 5 achieves both the best balance between the scene
reconstruction and 3D object removal accuracy. Figure 6 further visualizes the
influence of K during the 3D object removal process.

12

M. Ye et al.

Rendered View

2D Identity Loss

2D Identity Loss + 3D
Identity Loss

Inpainting region
of the rendered view

Inpainting result
of the rendered view

Fig. 7: Ablation on the Grouping Loss on the Bear inpainting case. The joint supervision of 2D and 3D losses addresses the “transparent bear issue", which shows better Gaussian Grouping accuracy. After deleting the Gaussians belonging to the bear,
we detect the image hole region with no Gaussians projection covering and then use
LaMa [46] to produce a single view inpainting result to guide the learning for newly
added inpainting Gaussians.

Visual Ablation on the Grouping Losses In Figure 7, we study the effect
of our grouping loss components, where solely using 2D Identity Loss will result
in the ‘transparent bear issue’. This is due to Gaussians inside the bear being
occluded during training and cannot be supervised sufficiently. We address it by
proposing 3D Identity/Regularization Loss for joint training with the 2D loss.
4.3

3D Multi-view Segmentation

Open-vocabulary Segmentation Comparison We compare the segmentation quality of Gaussian Grouping in 3D scenes with the state-of-the-art openvocabulary 3D segmentation methods, such as LERF [16] and SA3D [4]. To
compare fine-grained mask localization quality, we annotate the test views of
three 3D scenes from the LERF-Localization [16] dataset with accurate masks
to replace its original coarse bounding boxes. In Table 3, the advantage of our
Gaussian Grouping is significant, doubling the performance of LERF and SA3D
on both the "figurines" and "ramen" scenes. We also show the visual segmentation comparison in Figure 8, where the segmentation prediction by our method is
much more accurate with a clear boundary, while LERF-based similarity computing only provides a rough localization area. Since SAM does not support
language prompts, both SA3D and our method adopt Grounding DINO [26] to
identify the mask ID in a 2D image, and then pick the corresponding mask from
our anything masks prediction.
3D Panoptic Segmentation Comparison We compare the panoptic segmentation quality with Panoptic Lifting [44] in Table 4. We use the same semantic
mask labels from Mask-DINO [23] with semantic information for both Panoptic
Lifting [44] and our method. Gaussian Grouping outperforms Panoptic Lifting
in both performance and speed.
4.4

3D Scene Editing

3D Object Removal 3D object removal is to completely delete an object from
the 3D scene, where the background behind the removed instance / stuff can
be noisy or have a hole because of no observation. In Figure 9, we compare
the removal effect of our Gaussian Grouping with the Distilled Feature Fields

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

13

Prompt:
Egg

Prompt:
Pork belly

Prompt:
Green apple

Prompt:
Red toy chair

Rendered Image

LERF

Mask Prediction
(Ours)

Ours Anything Masks Prediction
(Ours)

PCA Feature Visualization
(Ours)

Fig. 8: Segmentation comparison between LERF [16] and our Gaussian Grouping on
the rendering view. The masks predicted by Gaussian Grouping contain much sharper
and more accurate boundaries than LERF. Also, our approach is better at distinguishing objects with similar colors, such as the “Green apple" prompt case.
Table 3: Comparison of Open Vocabu- Table 4: Panoptic segmentation comlary Segmentation on LERF-Mask dataset. parison on novel views. For semantic inWe adopt the detections from Grounding formation of the prediction, we adopt
DINO [26] to select mask IDs in a 3D scene. Mask-DINO [23] as the semantic mask
label generator for each view. We refer
figurines
ramen
teatime
Model
mIoU mBIoU mIoU mBIoU mIoU mBIoU
to the reported setting from [9].
DEVA [7]
46.2
LERF [16]
33.5
SA3D [4]
24.9
LangSplat [38]
52.8
Gaussian Grouping 69.7

45.1
30.6
23.8
50.5
67.9

56.8
28.3
7.4
50.4
77.0

51.1
14.7
7.0
44.7
68.7

54.3
49.7
42.5
69.5
71.7

52.2
42.6
39.2
65.6
66.1

Model
Panoptic Lifting [44]
Gaussian Grouping

Replica
ScanNet
mIoU (%) PQscene (%) FPS mIoU(%) PQscene (%) FPS
66.22
71.15

64.34
66.52

∼10
∼140

67.01
68.70

60.74
61.83

∼10
∼150

Rendered
Image

DFFs
(Background
after
removal)

Ours
(Background
after
removal)

Fig. 9: 3D Object removal on the Tanks & Temples dataset [18]. Compared to
DFFs [19], our Gaussian Grouping can remove the large-scale objects, such as truck,
from the 3D scene with greatly reduced artifacts w/o leaving a blurry background.

(DFFs) [19]. For challenging scene cases with large objects, our method can
clearly separate the 3D object from the background. While the performance of
DFFs is limited by the quality of its CLIP-distilled features, which results in
the complete foreground removal (Train case) or inaccurate region removal with
obvious artifacts (Truck case).
3D Object Inpainting Based on the 3D object removal, in the 3D object
inpainting task, we aim to further fill the “hole regions" due to missing observation across all views and make it a photo-realistic and view-consistent natural
3D scene. We first detect the regions which are invisible in all views after deletion, and then inpaint these “invisible regions” instead of the whole “2D object

14

M. Ye et al.

Rendered
Image

SPIn-NeRF
(5h train)

Ours
(1h train
+ 20min
finetune)

Fig. 10: Comparison on 3D object inpainting cases, where SPIn-NeRF [34] requires 5h
training while our method with better inpainting quality only needs 1 hour training
and 20 minutes finetuning.
Rendered
Test View

Rendered
Anything
Masks

3D Object
Removal in
both red and
green circles
Colorization
in purple
circle

Fig. 11: Multi-object editing within the
same 3D scene, where we concurrently
perform 3D object removal for objects in
the red and green circles, and colorization
for the glove in the purple circle.

Rendered
Views

Transfer
Result By
InstructNeRF2NeRF

Transfer
Result By
Gaussian
Grouping

Fig. 12: Visual comparison of 3D object style transfer between InstructNeRF2NeRF [12] and Gaussian Grouping
under the same instruction prompt “Turn
the bear into a panda”.

regions". In each rendering view, we adopt the 2D inpainted image to guide
the learning of the newly introduced 3D Gaussian. In Figure 10, compared to
SPIn-NeRF [34], the inpainting result of our Gaussian Grouping better preserves
spatial detail and multi-view coherence.
3D Object Style Transfer Gaussian Grouping supports 3D object style transfer efficiently. We compare with the recent Instruct-NeRF2NeRF [12] on 3D object style transfer in Figure 12, using the same instruction prompt “turn the
bear into a panda" and the same image guidance by InstructPix2Pix [2]. Gaussian Grouping produces more coherent and natural transferred “bear” across
views. Since our Gaussian Grouping models “anything masks” of the open-world
3D scene, including the bear, the spatial details of background regions (outside the bear) are also faithfully preserved by our method. While for InstructNeRF2NeRF, a large portion of background regions are unnecessarily getting
blurry with degraded quality. We describe the detailed pipeline of 3D object
style transfer in the Supp. file.
3D Multi-Object Editing In Figure 11, we demonstrate multiple editing
actions (like removing objects and colorization) on different Gaussian groups
of the 3D scene. This grouped 3D Gaussian representation enables concurrent
editing of several objects while maintaining non-interference among them.

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

15

Limitation Due to the lack of dynamic modeling and time-dependent updating,
the proposed 3D Gaussian Grouping method is currently limited to the static
3D scene. Also, it would also be interesting to further explore fully unsupervised
3D Gaussian grouping in the future.

5

Conclusion

We propose Gaussian Grouping, the first 3D Gaussian-based approach to jointly
reconstruct and segment anything in the open-world 3D scene. We introduce
an Identity Encoding for 3D Gaussians that is supervised both by 2D mask
predictions from SAM and 3D spatial consistency. Based on this grouped and
discrete 3D scene representation, we further show it can support versatile scene
editing applications, such as 3D object removal, 3D object inpainting, 3D object
style transfer and scene recomposition, with both high-quality visual effects and
good time efficiency.

6

Appendix

In this supplementary material, we first conduct additional experiment analysis of our Gaussian Grouping in Section 6.1, including multi-granularity, segmentation efficiency, quantitative editing evaluation and robustness. Then, in
Section 6.2, we describe the detailed process of annotating our proposed LERFMask datasets with the visualization of annotation examples. We further provide
a more detailed 3D object inpainting and style transfer pipeline description in
Section 6.3. Finally, we illustrate the algorithm pseudocode of our Gaussian
Grouping and more implementation details in Section 6.4, including the method
limitation analysis. Please refer to our project page for extensive 3D results
comparison.
6.1

Supplementary Experiments

Segmentation Efficiency In Fig. 13, we compare the segmentation results
with SA3D [4] on the proposed LERF-Mask dataset for open-world 3D segmentation. Our Gaussian Grouping shows great advantages in segmentation efficiency.
Using the same running environment, our Gaussian Grouping jointly segments
all objects of the 3D scene in 9 minutes, while SA3D requires 35 minutes for
each object due to its inverse rendering design in 3D voxel grids. To segment
each object of the 3D scene, SA3D repeatedly needs separate new training, which
makes SA3D time-consuming and not user-friendly in multi-object segmentation
or editing scenarios.
Multi-Granularity of Masks As in Fig. 14, our method can process SAM’s
anything masks at different granularity levels in the multiple views as follows:
Step 1). Firstly, SAM predicts dense anything mask proposals (including
both large-granularity and small-granularity ones) for each frame.

16

M. Ye et al.

Prompt:
Green apple

SA3D
(NeurIPS’23, 35min for a single object)

Mask Rendering
(Ours, 9 min for all objects)

Anything Masks Rendering
(Ours)

PCA Feature Visualization
(Ours)

Prompt:
Red toy chair

SA3D
(NeurIPS’23, 35min for a single object)

Mask Rendering
(Ours, 9 min for all objects)

Anything Masks Rendering
(Ours)

PCA Feature Visualization
(Ours)

Fig. 13: Segmentation comparison between SA3D [4] and our Gaussian Grouping on
the rendering view. We adopt PCA to visualize the rendered Identity Encoding features
in the rightmost column. Note that SA3D does not support concurrent multi-object segmentation due to its design limitation in the inverse rendering, which requires training
and rendering for each segmentation target for around 35 minutes (∼20min for training
and ∼15min for rendering). In contrast, our Gaussian Grouping shows great efficiency
by segmenting all objects in the scene only in 9 minutes.

Step 2). Then, these masks are scored and sorted based on their mask areas.
Masks are ranked in descending (from large to small) or ascending (from small
to large) order to pick varying levels of granularity for the label of each pixel.
Step 3). Furthermore, we filter large-area or small-area masks through their
overlapping IoU with a threshold.
Step 4). For mask association, masks are temporally propagated in a bidirection to obtain in-clip consensus. Refer to Sec 3.2 of Deva [7] for details.
Quantitative Evaluation of Editing Following Instruct-NeRF2NeRF [12],
we provide the CLIP Text-Image Direction Similarity evaluation for three of
our editing tasks in Table 5. Gaussian grouping supports versatile scene editing
tasks, including 3D Object Inpainting, 3D Object Style Transfer and 3D Object
Removal. For each of these editing tasks, Gaussian Grouping outperforms the
corresponding SOTA method specifically designed for it. For inpainting, the
descriptions of original and edited scenes are "Lego toy on the table" and "A
flat table". For style transfer, the descriptions are "A bear statue" and "Turn
the bear into a panda". For object removal, the descriptions are "A truck on
urban street" and "Urban street".

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

17

Fig. 14: Consistent tracking results at multi-granularity masks. The 1st row is in coarse
granularity, and the 2nd row is fine-grained.
Table 5: Quantitative comparison on three Scene Editing Tasks using the CLIP TextImage Direction Similarity [12].
Task

Dataset

Model

CLIP Text-Image Direction Similarity

3D Object Inpainting

MipNeRF360/Kitchen

SPIN-NeRF [34]
Ours

0.126
0.153

Instruct-NeRF2NeRF [12]
Ours

0.171
0.178

DFFs [19]
Ours

0.166
0.183

3D Object Style Transfer Instruct-NeRF2NeRF/Bear
3D Object Removal

Tandt/Truck

Fig. 15: Tracking results for a new object in subsequent frames. The red circle highlights the new chair appearing in the 2nd frame.

Robustness of New Objects SAM+Tracking can process new objects on
subsequent frames. When new high-confident segmentation doesn’t match the
previous objects and has high confidence, a new instance ID is assigned to it
(see the new chair in the red circle in Fig. 15).
Sparse View Input For few-shot or sparse-view input, video tracking still obtains a good result for pre-processing, since it is visual feature-based and cameramotion robust. In Figure 16, we use a 3-view input for DEVA pre-processing
and still get a decent tracking result. 3D reconstruction of the original Gaussian Splatting is not good with sparse-view input, but it is beyond the scope
of this paper. It is retained as a component for sparse-view Gaussian Splatting
reconstruction, intended for further research in the future.
6.2

Details on the LERF-Mask Annotation

Annotation Pipeline To measure the segmentation or fine-grained localization
accuracy in the open-wold 3D scene, we construct the LERF-Mask dataset based
on the existing LERF-Localization [16] evaluation dataset, where we manually

M. Ye et al.

Reconstruction
(3D-GS)

Tracking
（DEVA）

18

Fig. 16: Sparse 3-view tracking and reconstruction comparison.

annotate three scenes from LERF-Localization with accurate masks instead of
using coarse bounding boxes. For each 3D scene, we provide 7.7 text queries
with corresponding GT mask labels on average. We use Roboflow [10] platform
for label annotation, and it uses SAM [17] as an auxiliary tool for interactive
segmentation. Similar to the annotation used in LERF, for each of the 3 scenes,
we choose 2-4 novel views for testing and annotating the rendering of novel views.
Annotation Examples All language prompts used for our LERF-Mask dataset
evaluation are listed in Table 6, which contains 23 prompts in total. Also, we
provide visualization on the mask annotations in Figure 17.

Scene

Text queries

green apple
Figurines
porcelain hand
rubber duck with red hat
Ramen

Teatime

chopsticks
pork belly
apple
cookies on a plate
sheep
tea in a glass

green toy chair
red apple

old camera
red toy chair

egg
glass of water
wavy noodles in bowl yellow bowl
bag of cookies
paper napkin
spoon handle

coffee mug
plate
stuffed bear

Table 6: Prompt labels used during segmentation experiments in our proposed LERFMask dataset (23 total).

6.3

Local Gaussian Editing: Steps of Object Inpainting & Style
Transfer

3D Object Inpainting Pipeline For inpainting, we remove the 3D Gaussians
of the selected target by using a Gaussian Grouping model well-trained for 3D
reconstruction and segmentation and add new Gaussians for finetuning. The
steps are as follows:
Step 1). Train the Gaussian Grouping model with our proposed 2D and 3D
Identity Grouping loss.
Step 2). Select the target object for inpainting. For each Identity Encoding
associated with a 3D Gaussian, we acquire its linear layer classification result.
Subsequently, we remove those 3D Gaussians that are classified as the label of

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

19

Fig. 17: Annotation visualization of our proposed LERF-Mask dataset. We manually
annotate three scenes from LERF-Localization [16] with accurate masks instead to
replace the coarse bounding boxes in [12]. The text queries are detailed in Table 6.

the selected object. Also, we remove the 3D Gaussians with position inside the
convex hull of the object Gaussians.
Step 3). On the rendering views after the deletion of the object, we detect
the “blurry hole" with Grounding-DINO [26] as the mask for 2D inpainting and
use DEVA [7] for association. We use LAMA [46] inpainting on each view as the
target for finetuning.
Step 4). After the 3D Gaussians of the target object are deleted, we clone
200K new Gaussians near the deletion region. We freeze the other Gaussians,
and only finetune the newly introduced 3D Gaussians.
Step 5). During the finetuning, we employ L1 loss only in the outside regions
of the object mask, and adopt LPIPS loss inside the bounding box of the object

20

M. Ye et al.

mask.

3D Object Style Transfer Pipeline For style transfer, we finetune the 3D
Gaussians belonging to the corresponding target by using a Gaussian Grouping
model well-trained for 3D reconstruction and segmentation. The steps are as
follows:
Step 1). Train our Gaussian Grouping model with our proposed 2D and 3D
Identity Grouping loss.
Step 2). Select the target object for style transfer. For each Identity Encoding
associated with a 3D Gaussian, we acquire its linear layer classification result.
Subsequently, we only finetune those 3D Gaussians that are classified as the label
of the selected object. Also, we finetune the 3D Gaussians with position inside
the convex hull of the selected object. The Gaussians irrelevant to the editing
target are frozen. During finetuning, we freeze the 3D position of Gaussains and
make other Gaussian parameters (color, variance, opacity, etc.) trainable.
Step 3). During the finetuning process, we dynamically update the target images using an image-level style transfer model that has been pre-trained. Specifically, we employ InstructPix2Pix [2], introducing a noise input composed of
the rendered view combined with random noise. This approach involves conditioning the diffusion model on a ground truth image to enhance accuracy and
consistency.
Step 4). To preserve the spatial details of the background regions, rendering
losses are exclusively performed within the mask of the style transfer target. On
the 2D rendered view, we employ L1 loss inside the object mask and LPIPS loss
within the bounding box that encloses the object mask.
6.4

More Implementation Details

More implementation details We implement Gaussian Grouping based on
Gaussian Splatting [15]. We add a 16-dimension identity encoding as a feature of
each Gaussian, and implement forward and backward cuda rasterization similar
to the direct current of Spherical Harmonics. The 3D Identity Encoding has a
shape of N ∗ 1 ∗ 16, where N is the number of Gaussians. We set the degree
of Spherical Harmonics to zero since instance identity does not change across
views. The rendered 2D Identity Encoding has a shape of 16∗H ∗W . 3D Identity
Encoding and 2D Identity Encoding share the same identity classification linear
layer with (16, 256) input and output channels.
During training, we set λ2d = 1.0 and λ3d = 2.0. We use the Adam optimizer
for both Gaussians and the linear layer, with a learning rate of 0.0025 for identity
encoding and 0.0005 for the linear layer. For 3D regularization loss, we set the
nearest neighboring number to k = 5, and the sampling points number to m =
1000. To improve efficiency and avoid calculating loss at boundary points, we
downsample the point cloud to 300K to calculate the loss. 3D regularization
loss only affects the segmentation of identity encoding and does not affect the

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

21

density of the Gaussians. We use the same adaptive density control as Gaussian
Splatting. All datasets are trained for 30K iterations on one A100 GPU.
6.5

Limitation

Our Gaussian Grouping segments “anything masks” with the assistance of SAM.
But the “anything mask labels" by original SAM [17] have no direct semantic
language information. We adopt the Grounding-DINO [26] for open vocabulary
segmentation to pick the 2D object, and match our anything masks rendering.
When some language prompts are very complicated, the Grounding-DINO can
not acquire the correct mask from the input text prompt and will give a wrong
mask prediction. In this case, even if we provide the correct mask in anything
mask rendering, we do not obtain explicit category information. Also, the zeroshot 2D association accuracy of DEVA [7] will also limit the open-world 3D
segmentation performance of Gaussian Grouping. This can be solved by further improvement of the vision language detection model and better association
schemes in the future.

22

M. Ye et al.

References
1. Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-nerf
360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In: CVPR (2022)
2. Brooks, T., Holynski, A., Efros, A.A.: Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image
editing instructions. In: CVPR (2023)
3. Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., Jégou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., Joulin,
A.: Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In: ICCV (2021)
4. Cen, J., Zhou, Z., Fang, J., Yang, C., Shen, W., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Tian, Q.:
Segment anything in 3d with nerfs. In: NeurIPS (2023)
5. Chen, X., Tang, J., Wan, D., Wang, J., Zeng, G.: Interactive segment anything
nerf with feature imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16233 (2023)
6. Chen, Z., Wang, F., Liu, H.: Text-to-3d using gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16585 (2023)
7. Cheng, H.K., Oh, S.W., Price, B., Schwing, A., Lee, J.Y.: Tracking anything with
decoupled video segmentation. In: ICCV (2023)
8. Dai, A., Chang, A.X., Savva, M., Halber, M., Funkhouser, T., Nießner, M.: Scannet:
Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In: CVPR (2017)
9. Dou, B., Zhang, T., Ma, Y., Wang, Z., Yuan, Z.: Cosseggaussians: Compact
and swift scene segmenting 3d gaussians with dual feature fusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.05925 (2024)
10. Dwyer, B., Nelson, J., Solawetz, J.: Roboflow (version 1.0) [software].
https://roboflow.com. (2022)
11. Fu, X., Zhang, S., Chen, T., Lu, Y., Zhu, L., Zhou, X., Geiger, A., Liao, Y.:
Panoptic nerf: 3d-to-2d label transfer for panoptic urban scene segmentation. In:
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) (2022)
12. Haque, A., Tancik, M., Efros, A., Holynski, A., Kanazawa, A.: Instruct-nerf2nerf:
Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In: ICCV (2023)
13. Kania, K., Yi, K.M., Kowalski, M., Trzciński, T., Tagliasacchi, A.: CoNeRF: Controllable Neural Radiance Fields. In: CVPR (2022)
14. Ke, L., Ye, M., Danelljan, M., Liu, Y., Tai, Y.W., Tang, C.K., Yu, F.: Segment
anything in high quality. In: NeurIPS (2023)
15. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for
real-time radiance field rendering. ACM TOG 42(4), 1–14 (2023)
16. Kerr, J., Kim, C.M., Goldberg, K., Kanazawa, A., Tancik, M.: Lerf: Language
embedded radiance fields. In: ICCV (2023)
17. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T.,
Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., et al.: Segment anything. In: ICCV (2023)
18. Knapitsch, A., Park, J., Zhou, Q.Y., Koltun, V.: Tanks and temples: Benchmarking
large-scale scene reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 36(4), 1–13
(2017)
19. Kobayashi, S., Matsumoto, E., Sitzmann, V.: Decomposing nerf for editing via
feature field distillation. In: NeurIPS (2022)
20. Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Rainer, G., Jambon, C., Drettakis, G.: Neural point
catacaustics for novel-view synthesis of reflections. ACM TOG 41(6), 1–15 (2022)
21. Kopanas, G., Philip, J., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: Point-based neural rendering with per-view optimization. In: Computer Graphics Forum. vol. 40, pp. 29–43
(2021)

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

23

22. Kundu, A., Genova, K., Yin, X., Fathi, A., Pantofaru, C., Guibas, L.J., Tagliasacchi, A., Dellaert, F., Funkhouser, T.: Panoptic neural fields: A semantic objectaware neural scene representation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12871–12881 (2022)
23. Li, F., Zhang, H., xu, H., Liu, S., Zhang, L., Ni, L.M., Shum, H.Y.: Mask dino:
Towards a unified transformer-based framework for object detection and segmentation. In: CVPR (2023)
24. Li, Y., Lin, Z.H., Forsyth, D., Huang, J.B., Wang, S.: Climatenerf: Extreme weather
synthesis in neural radiance field. In: ICCV (2023)
25. Liu, H.K., Shen, I., Chen, B.Y., et al.: Nerf-in: Free-form nerf inpainting with rgb-d
priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04901 (2022)
26. Liu, S., Zeng, Z., Ren, T., Li, F., Zhang, H., Yang, J., Li, C., Yang, J., Su, H., Zhu,
J., et al.: Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set
object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05499 (2023)
27. Liu, S., Zhang, X., Zhang, Z., Zhang, R., Zhu, J.Y., Russell, B.: Editing conditional
radiance fields. In: ICCV (2021)
28. Liu, Y., Hu, B., Huang, J., Tai, Y.W., Tang, C.K.: Instance neural radiance field.
In: ICCV (2023)
29. Luiten, J., Kopanas, G., Leibe, B., Ramanan, D.: Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking
by persistent dynamic view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09713 (2023)
30. Max, N.: Optical models for direct volume rendering. IEEE TVCG 1(2), 99–108
(1995)
31. Mazur, K., Sucar, E., Davison, A.J.: Feature-realistic neural fusion for real-time,
open set scene understanding. In: ICRA (2023)
32. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Ortiz-Cayon, R., Kalantari, N.K., Ramamoorthi,
R., Ng, R., Kar, A.: Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with prescriptive sampling guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) (2019)
33. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng,
R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: ECCV
(2020)
34. Mirzaei, A., Aumentado-Armstrong, T., Derpanis, K.G., Kelly, J., Brubaker, M.A.,
Gilitschenski, I., Levinshtein, A.: Spin-nerf: Multiview segmentation and perceptual inpainting with neural radiance fields. In: CVPR (2023)
35. Mirzaei, A., Kant, Y., Kelly, J., Gilitschenski, I.: Laterf: Label and text driven
object radiance fields. In: ECCV (2022)
36. Ost, J., Mannan, F., Thuerey, N., Knodt, J., Heide, F.: Neural scene graphs for
dynamic scenes. In: CVPR (2021)
37. Peng, S., Genova, K., Jiang, C., Tagliasacchi, A., Pollefeys, M., Funkhouser, T.,
et al.: Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open vocabularies. In: CVPR (2023)
38. Qin, M., Li, W., Zhou, J., Wang, H., Pfister, H.: Langsplat: 3d language gaussian
splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16084 (2023)
39. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry,
G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models
from natural language supervision. In: ICML (2021)
40. Rebain, D., Jiang, W., Yazdani, S., Li, K., Yi, K.M., Tagliasacchi, A.: Derf: Decomposed radiance fields. In: CVPR (2021)
41. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B.: High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In: CVPR (2022)
42. Schult, J., Engelmann, F., Hermans, A., Litany, O., Tang, S., Leibe, B.: Mask3D:
Mask Transformer for 3D Semantic Instance Segmentation. In: ICRA (2023)

24

M. Ye et al.

43. Shen, Q., Yang, X., Wang, X.: Anything-3d: Towards single-view anything reconstruction in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10261 (2023)
44. Siddiqui, Y., Porzi, L., Bulò, S.R., Müller, N., Nießner, M., Dai, A., Kontschieder,
P.: Panoptic lifting for 3d scene understanding with neural fields. In: CVPR (2023)
45. Straub, J., Whelan, T., Ma, L., Chen, Y., Wijmans, E., Green, S., Engel, J.J., MurArtal, R., Ren, C., Verma, S., Clarkson, A., Yan, M., Budge, B., Yan, Y., Pan,
X., Yon, J., Zou, Y., Leon, K., Carter, N., Briales, J., Gillingham, T., Mueggler,
E., Pesqueira, L., Savva, M., Batra, D., Strasdat, H.M., Nardi, R.D., Goesele, M.,
Lovegrove, S., Newcombe, R.: The Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor
spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797 (2019)
46. Suvorov, R., Logacheva, E., Mashikhin, A., Remizova, A., Ashukha, A., Silvestrov,
A., Kong, N., Goka, H., Park, K., Lempitsky, V.: Resolution-robust large mask
inpainting with fourier convolutions. In: WACV (2022)
47. Takmaz, A., Fedele, E., Sumner, R.W., Pollefeys, M., Tombari, F., Engelmann, F.:
OpenMask3D: Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation. In: NeurIPS (2023)
48. Tang, J., Ren, J., Zhou, H., Liu, Z., Zeng, G.: Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian
splatting for efficient 3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16653 (2023)
49. Tschernezki, V., Laina, I., Larlus, D., Vedaldi, A.: Neural feature fusion
fields: 3d distillation of self-supervised 2d image representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.03494 (2022)
50. Tschernezki, V., Laina, I., Larlus, D., Vedaldi, A.: Neural feature fusion fields: 3D
distillation of self-supervised 2D image representations. In: International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) (2022)
51. Vora, S., Radwan, N., Greff, K., Meyer, H., Genova, K., Sajjadi, M.S.M., Pot,
E., Tagliasacchi, A., Duckworth, D.: Nesf: Neural semantic fields for generalizable
semantic segmentation of 3d scenes (2021)
52. Wang, B., Chen, L., Yang, B.: Dm-nerf: 3d scene geometry decomposition and
manipulation from 2d images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07227 (2022)
53. Wang, C., Chai, M., He, M., Chen, D., Liao, J.: Clip-nerf: Text-and-image driven
manipulation of neural radiance fields. In: CVPR (2022)
54. Wu, G., Yi, T., Fang, J., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang,
X.: 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08528 (2023)
55. Wu, Q., Liu, X., Chen, Y., Li, K., Zheng, C., Cai, J., Zheng, J.: Objectcompositional neural implicit surfaces. In: ECCV (2022)
56. Yang, B., Zhang, Y., Xu, Y., Li, Y., Zhou, H., Bao, H., Zhang, G., Cui, Z.: Learning
object-compositional neural radiance field for editable scene rendering. In: ICCV
(2021)
57. Yang, Y., Wu, X., He, T., Zhao, H., Liu, X.: Sam3d: Segment anything in 3d scenes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03908 (2023)
58. Yang, Z., Yang, H., Pan, Z., Zhu, X., Zhang, L.: Real-time photorealistic dynamic
scene representation and rendering with 4d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.10642 (2023)
59. Yang, Z., Gao, X., Zhou, W., Jiao, S., Zhang, Y., Jin, X.: Deformable 3d gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.13101 (2023)
60. Yi, T., Fang, J., Wu, G., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang, X.: Gaussiandreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d gaussian splatting with point cloud
priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08529 (2023)

Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes

25

61. Yifan, W., Serena, F., Wu, S., Öztireli, C., Sorkine-Hornung, O.: Differentiable surface splatting for point-based geometry processing. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 38(6), 1–14 (2019)
62. Yu, H.X., Guibas, L.J., Wu, J.: Unsupervised discovery of object radiance fields.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07905 (2021)
63. Yuan, Y.J., Sun, Y.T., Lai, Y.K., Ma, Y., Jia, R., Gao, L.: Nerf-editing: geometry
editing of neural radiance fields. In: CVPR (2022)
64. Zhang, C., Han, D., Qiao, Y., Kim, J.U., Bae, S.H., Lee, S., Hong, C.S.: Faster
segment anything: Towards lightweight sam for mobile applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.14289 (2023)
65. Zhang, J., Liu, X., Ye, X., Zhao, F., Zhang, Y., Wu, M., Zhang, Y., Xu, L., Yu, J.:
Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40(4), 1–18 (2021)
66. Zhang, X., Kundu, A., Funkhouser, T., Guibas, L., Su, H., Genova, K.: Nerflets:
Local radiance fields for efficient structure-aware 3d scene representation from 2d
supervision. In: CVPR (2023)
67. Zhi, S., Laidlow, T., Leutenegger, S., Davison, A.J.: In-place scene labelling and
understanding with implicit scene representation. In: ICCV (2021)
68. Zwicker, M., Pfister, H., Van Baar, J., Gross, M.: Surface splatting. In: Proceedings
of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques.
pp. 371–378 (2001)

