GraspSplats:
Efficient Manipulation with 3D Feature Splatting

arXiv:2409.02084v1 [cs.RO] 3 Sep 2024

Mazeyu Ji∗ , Ri-Zhao Qiu∗ , Xueyan Zou, Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego
∗
Equal contribution
https://graspsplats.github.io

Abstract: The ability for robots to perform efficient and zero-shot grasping of
object parts is crucial for practical applications and is becoming prevalent with
recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs). To bridge the 2D-to-3D
gap for representations to support such a capability, existing methods rely on neural fields (NeRFs) via differentiable rendering or point-based projection methods.
However, we demonstrate that NeRFs are inappropriate for scene changes due
to their implicitness and point-based methods are inaccurate for part localization without rendering-based optimization. To amend these issues, we propose
GraspSplats. Using depth supervision and a novel reference feature computation method, GraspSplats generates high-quality scene representations in under
60 seconds. We further validate the advantages of Gaussian-based representation
by showing that the explicit and optimized geometry in GraspSplats is sufficient
to natively support (1) real-time grasp sampling and (2) dynamic and articulated object manipulation with point trackers. With extensive experiments on
a Franka robot, we demonstrate that GraspSplats significantly outperforms existing methods under diverse task settings. In particular, GraspSplats outperforms
NeRF-based methods like F3RM and LERF-TOGO, and 2D detection methods.
Keywords: Zero-shot manipulation, Gaussian Splatting, Keypoint Tracking

1

Introduction

Efficient zero-shot manipulation with part-level understanding is crucial for downstream robotics applications. Consider a kitchen robot deployed to a new home: given a recipe with language instructions, the robot pulls a drawer by its handle, grasps a tool by its grips, and then pushes the drawer
back. To perform these tasks, the robot must dynamically understand part-level grasp affordances
to interact effectively with objects. Recent work, such as [1, 2, 3], explores this understanding by
embedding reference features from large-scale pre-trained vision models (e.g., CLIP [4]) into Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs). However, those methods [2, 1] offer only a static understanding of
the scene at the object level and require minutes to train the scene, necessitating costly retraining
after any scene changes. This limitation significantly hinders practical applications involving object displacements, or requiring part-level understanding. On the other hand, point-based methods
such as [5], which perform back-projection of 2D features, are efficient in feature construction but
struggle with visual occlusion and often fail to infer fine-grained spatial relationships without further
optimization.
In addition to dynamic and part-level scene understanding, achieving fine manipulation requires the
robot to have a strong understanding of both the geometry and semantics of the scene. For this
capability to emerge from coarse 2D visual features, further optimization is necessary to bridge the
2D-to-3D gap. NeRF-based methods [6, 2, 1] facilitate this understanding through differentiable
rendering. However, NeRFs [7, 6, 2, 1] are fundamentally implicit representations, making them
difficult to edit to accommodate scene changes, thus leading to a static assumption. To address

Pick up tools by their grips

Track truck and unload

Grasp mugs by handles

Lift a teapot by the handle

Grasp fruit from turntable

Clean cluttered tools by grips

Serve struck ball

Open a cabinet by handle

Figure 1: GraspSplats supports diverse robotics tasks using feature-enhanced 3D Gaussians. Compared to existing NeRF-based methods [1, 2], GraspSplats transforms the feature representation to
reflect object motions in real-time with point tracking from one or more cameras, which makes it
possible to perform zero-shot dynamic and articulated object manipulation by parts.
dynamic problems, some works [8, 9, 10, 11] commonly predict grasp poses using 3D dense correspondences, where reliable grasps are identified based on keypoints in a reference state and then
applied to various viewpoints or object placements. However, these methods face challenges in
tracking object states over time and handling identical objects.
To this end, we propose GraspSplats. Given posed RGBD frames from a calibrated camera, GraspSplats constructs a high-fidelity representation as a collection of explicit Gaussian ellipsoids via
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [12, 13]. GraspSplats reconstructs a scene in under 30 seconds and
supports efficient part-level grasping for static and rigid transformation, which enables manipulation such as tracking part objects that is not possible with existing methods. GraspSplats initializes
Gaussians from the coarse geometry of depth frames; while computing reference features for each
input view in real time using MobileSAM [14] and MaskCLIP [15]. These Gaussians are further
optimized for geometry, texture, and semantics via differentiable rasterization. The user can supply an object name query (e.g., ‘mug’) and part query (e.g., ‘handle’) for GraspSplats to efficiently
predict part-level affordance and generate grasp proposals. GraspSplats directly generates grasping proposals using explicit Gaussian primitives in milliseconds, for which we extend an existing
antipodal grasp generator [16, 17]. In addition, we further exploit the explicit representation to maintain high-quality representations under object displacement. Using a point tracker [18], GraspSplats
coarsely edits the scene to capture rigid transformations and further optimizes it with partial scene
reconstruction.
We implemented GraspSplats on a desktop-grade computer with a real Franka Research (FR3) robot
to evaluate its efficacy in tabletop manipulation. Every component in GraspSplats is efficient and
empirically runs a magnitude (10×) faster than existing work [2, 1] — computing 2D reference
features, optimizing the 3D representation, and generating 2-finger grasp proposals. This makes
it possible to simultaneously generate GraspSplats representation in parallel to arm scans. In experiments, GraspSplats outperforms NeRF-based methods like F3RM and LERF-TOGO, and other
point-based methods.
Our contribution is threefold:
• A framework that advocates 3DGS for grasping representation. GraspSplats efficiently reconstructs scenes with geometry, texture, and semantics supervision, which outperforms baselines
on zero-shot part-based grasping in terms of both accuracy and efficiency.
• Techniques towards an editable high-fidelity representation, which goes beyond zero-shot manipulation in static scenes into dynamic and articulated object manipulation.
• Extensive real-robot experiments that validate GraspSplats as an effective tool for zero-shot
grasping in both static and dynamic scenes, which demonstrates the superiority of our method
over NeRF-based or point-based methods.
2

2

Related Work

Language-guided Manipulation. To support zero-shot manipulation, robots must leverage priors
learned from internet-scale data. There have been some recent works [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 5] that
use 2D foundation vision models (CLIP [4], SAM [25], or GroundingDINO [26]) to build openvocabulary 3D representations. However, these methods mostly rely on simple 2D back-projection.
Without further rendering-based optimization, they generally fail to provide precise part-level information. Recently, building on the work of DFF [3] and LERF [6], researchers [1, 2, 27, 28] have
found that combining feature distillation with neural rendering yields promising representations
for robotics manipulation, as it offers both high-quality semantics and geometry. Notably, LERFTOGO [2] proposed conditional CLIP queries and DINO regularization for zero-shot manipulation
by parts. F3RM [1] learned grasping from few-shot demonstrations. Evo-NeRF [29] focuses on
NeRF specialized for stacked transparent objects, which conceptually is orthogonal to our method.
However, these methods are based on NeRFs [7], which is fundamentally implicit. Though certain
NeRF representations can be adapted to model dynamic movement, such as grid-based methods [1],
dynamic scenes are more natural to be modeled with explicit methods.
Grasp Pose Detection. Grasp pose detection has been a long-standing topic [30, 31, 32, 33, 16,
17, 34, 35, 36] in robotics manipulation. Existing methods can be roughly divided into two categories: end-to-end and sampling-based approaches. End-to-end methods [32, 33, 35, 36] offer
streamlined pipelines for grasp poses and incorporating learned semantic priors (e.g., mugs grasped
by the handle). However, these methods often require the testing data modalities (e.g., viewpoint,
object category, and transformations) to match training distribution exactly. For instance, LERFTOGO [2] resolves viewpoint variation of GraspNet [32] by generating hundreds of point clouds
for input using different transformations, requiring significant computational time. Sampling-based
methods [16, 17], on the other hand, do not learn semantic priors but offer reliable and rapid results when explicit representations are available. In this work, we find that the explicit Gaussian
primitives are natural to be connected to sampling-based methods [16, 17], and features embedded
in GraspSplats complements the semantic priors via language guidance. This intuitive combination
allows efficient and accurate sampling of grasping poses in dynamic and cluttered environments.
Concurrent Work. Concurrently, multiple approaches [37, 38, 39, 40] are beginning to interface
Gaussian Splatting [12] with 2D features. The majority of these works focus solely on appearance
editing [37, 38, 39]. We built GraspSplats based on Feature Splatting [38] for its engineeringly
optimized implementation and further reduces the overall reconstruction time to 1/10. During the
preparation of the manuscript, a concurrent work appeared [40]. Similar to our work, Zheng et al.
[40] also combines Gaussian Splatting [12] with the feature distillation for grasping. However,
Zheng et al. [40] does not handle part-level queries for task-oriented manipulation [2] and still mostly
focuses on static scenarios. Though they provide a brief demonstration of the potential of Gaussian
primitives in handling moving objects, they still make a strong assumption — object representations
are displaced only when they are moved by the robot arm. Such an assumption falls short in more
general scenarios that involve external forces (e.g., displacement by other machines or humans). In
addition, they still require costly reference feature generation. The most concurrent work [41] uses
Gaussian Splatting for robotic manipulation, but it only fuses data from a few fixed cameras and
thus does not address part-level manipulation. GraspSplats extends Gaussian Splatting [12] as a
promising alternative to address these issues.

3

Efficient Manipulation with 3D Feature Splatting

Problem Formulation. We assume a robot with a parallel gripper, a calibrated in-wrist RGBD
camera, and a calibrated third-person view camera. Given a scene containing a set of objects, the
objective is for the robot to grasp and lift an object via language queries (e.g., ‘kitchen knife’).
Optionally, a part query may be further supplied to specify the part to grasp (e.g., ‘handle’) for taskoriented manipulation [2]. It is worth noting that, unlike previous works [1, 2], we do not assume
3

Initial Scene Scan

MobileSAM 🧩

…

Hierarchical
Features

Cropped Object Patches

…

📎 CLIP

Feature
Splatting

Part Feat. 𝑭$%&'

Obj-level Masks
Masked
Average Pooling

Obj Feat. 𝑭!"#

Image-level CLIP 📎

Figure 2: GraspSplats employs two techniques to efficiently construct feature-enhanced 3D Gaussians: hierarchical feature extraction and dense initialization from geometry regularization, which
reduces the overall runtime to 1/10 of existing GS methods [38]. (High-dimensional features are
visualized using PCA and the visualized Gaussian ellipsoids are trained without densification).
that the scene is static. Instead, we aim to design a more generalized algorithm where part-level
grasping affordance and sampling can be done continuously even with object movement.
Background. The original Gaussian Splatting [12] (GS) focuses on novel view synthesis and is
restricted to using only texture information as supervision. Several recent works [38, 39, 37] attempt
to extend GS to reconstruct dense 2D features. More concretely, GraspSplats renders the depth D̂,
color Ĉ, and the dense visual features F̂ with the splatting algorithm:
{D̂, F̂, Ĉ} =

X

{di , fi , ci } · αi

i−1
Y

(1 − αj ) ,

(1)

j=1

i∈N

where di , fi , and ci is the per-gaussian distance to the camera origin, latent feature vector, and color,
αi is per-gaussian opacity, and the indices i ∈ N are in the ascending order sorted by di . Following
the convention [38], we further assume that per-gaussian feature vector fi is isotropic. The rendered
depth, images, and features are then supervised using L2 loss. Note that all recent works [38, 37, 39]
follow a similar paradigm as Eq. 1. We provide complete details in the supplementary materials.
Overview. To support open-ended grasping, GraspSplats proposes three key components. The
overviews are given in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. First, a way to construct a scene representation efficiently
with novel reference features and geometric regularization. Second, a way to generate grasp proposals directly on 3D Gaussians, using 3D conditional language queries and an extended antipodal
grasp proposer [16, 17]. Finally, a way to edit Gaussians under object displacement which enables
dynamic and articulated object manipulation.
3.1

Constructing Feature-enhanced 3D Gaussians

We use differentiable rasterization [12, 38] to lift 2D features to 3D representation. Though existing
works in feature-enhanced GS offers part-level understanding [38, 39], one commonly overlooked
weakness is the expensive overhead before the scene optimization begins. This overhead can be
further dissected to (1) costly reference feature computation [2] or (2) densification of sparse Gaussians [38] originated from SfM preprocessing [12, 42], which we address in this work.
Efficient Hierarchical Reference Feature Computation. Existing methods [2, 39, 40] spend
most compute efforts to regularize coarse CLIP features — either through thousands of multi-scale
queries [2] or mask-based regularization [38, 39, 40] through costly grid sampling [25].
We propose a way to efficiently regularize CLIP using MobileSAMV2 [14]. We generate hierarchical features, object-level and part-level, specialized for grasping. Given an input image, MobileSAMV2 [14] predicts class-agnostic bounding boxes Dobj := {(xi , yi , wi , hi )}N
i=1 and a set of
4

Initial Gaussians

Real-time Object Tracking

Deformed Gaussians

Grasp “yellow
mug” by “handle”.

Semantic-aware Sampling

Planning & Execution

Object-level
Query
Part-level
Query

Figure 3: Given an initial state of Gaussians and RGB-D observations from one or more cameras,
GraspSplats tracks the 3D motion of objects specified via language, which is used to deform the
Gaussian representations in real-time. Given object-part text pairs, GraspSplats proposes grasping
poses using both semantics and geometry of Gaussian primitives in milliseconds.
object masks {M}. For object-level feature, we first use MaskCLIP [15] to compute coarse CLIP
′
′
features of the entire image FC ∈ RH ×W ×C . We then follow Qiu et al. [38] and use Masked
Average Pooling to regularize object-level CLIP features with {M}, which we detail in Sec. C.
For part-level features, we extract image patches from Dobj for batched inference on
MaskCLIP [15]. Since Dobj incorporates object priors learned from the SA-1B dataset [25], N
is significantly smaller than the number of patches needed from uniform queries [6] for efficient
inference. We then interpolate the features to remap them into the original image shape and average
over multiple instances to form Fpart for part-level supervision.
During differentiable rasterization, we introduce a shallow MLP with two output branches that takes
in the rendered features F̂ from Eq. 1 as intermediate features. The first branch renders the objectlevel feature F̂D and the second branch renders the part-level feature F̂obj , F̂part = MLP(F̂),
where F̂obj and F̂part are supervised using Fobj and Fpart with cosine loss. We scale the part-level
term in the joint loss Lobj + λ · Lpart with λ = 2.0 to emphasize part-level segmentation.
Geometry Regularization via Depth. Existing feature-enhanced GS methods [38, 39, 37] have
no supervision for geometry. In GraspSplats, we project points from depth images as centers of the
initial Gaussians. In addition, we use depth as supervision during training. Empirically, this additional geometric regularization significantly reduces the training time and better surface geometry.
3.2

Static Scene: Part-level Object Localization and Grasp Sampling

To support efficient zero-shot part-level grasping, GraspSplats performs object-level query, conditional part-level query, and grasp sampling. Unlike NeRF-based approaches [2], which requires
costly rendering to extract language-aligned features and geometry from implicit MLPs, GraspSplats
operates directly on Gaussian primitives for efficient localization and grasping queries.
Open-vocabulary Object Querying. We first perform object-level open-vocabulary query (e.g.,
mug), where we take language queries to select objects for grasping, with optional negative queries
to filter out other objects. We do so by directly identifying 3D Gaussians whose isotropic CLIP
features more closely align with positive queries over negative queries. The feature-text comparison
process follows standard CLIP practices [4, 1] and is detailed in Sec. B.
Open-vocabulary Conditional Part-level Querying. As discussed by Rashid et al. [2], CLIP exhibits bag-of-words-like behavior (e.g., the activation of ‘mug handle’ tends to contain both mugs
and handles). Thus, it is necessary to perform conditional queries. While LERF-TOGO [2] requires
a two-step (render-voxelization) process; GraspSplats natively supports CLIP queries conditioned
on Gaussian primitives. In particular, given an object segmented from the previous operation, we
simply repeat the procedure with the new part-level query and limit the set of Gaussians to the
segmented object. A qualitative example of this part-level conditioning is given in Fig. 3.
5

Grasp Sampling using Gaussian Primitives. We perform grasp sampling directly on the Gaussian
primitives for streamlined grasping. To do so, we combine GraspSplats with GPG, a samplingbased grasp proposer [16, 17]. We first define a workspace Robj as the 3D space expanded from the
segmented object part. The expansion radius is the sum of both the longest axes of the scales of the
Gaussian primitives and the gripper’s collision radius. Then, we sample N points from Robj . Within
the neighborhood Rp of these sampled points where Rp refers to the area within a specified distance
from the selected point, we aggregate Gaussian primitives with rendered normals and compute the
reference coordinate system for grasp sampling with the average normal direction
X
n̂(g)n̂(g)T
M (p) =
(2)
g∈Rp

where n̂(g) denotes the unit surface normal of the gaussian primitive g. In the reference frame of
each sampled point p, we perform a local grid search to find candidate grasps, where the finger of
the gripper at terminal candidate grasps contacts the geometry of the segmented part. The details
are given in Sec. D.
3.3

Dynamic Scene: Real-time Tracking and Optimization

Using representations optimized for semantics and geometry, it is natural to extend GraspSplats to
track object displacements and edit the Gaussian primitives in real time. It is worth noting that such
operation is challenging for existing NeRF-based methods [2, 1].
Multi-view Object Tracking with keypoints. Assume one or more calibrated cameras without
egocentric motions. Given an object language query, we segment its 3D Gaussian primitives and
rasterize a 2D mask to the camera. We then discretize the rendered mask into a set of points as
input to a point tracker [18], which continuously tracks the 2D coordinates of given points. We
translate these 2D correspondences into 3D using depth. To filter out noisy correspondences, we
use a simple DBSCAN [43] clustering algorithm to filter out 3D outliers. Finally, for the remaining
correspondence points, we use the Kabsch [44] algorithm to solve for the SE(3) transformation,
which we apply to the segmented 3D Gaussians primitives. For multiple cameras, we append the
estimated 3D correspondences from all cameras to the system of equations for the Kabsch algorithm.
Note that the displacement can be exerted either by the arm or other external forces.
Partial Fine-Tuning. Edited scenes may have undesirable artifacts for regions unobserved during
the initial reconstruction (e.g., surface underneath displaced objects). Optionally, GraspSplats supports partial scene re-training using object masks rendered before and after the displacement, which
is much more efficient than a complete reconstruction.

4

Experiments

In this section, we conduct experiments to validate the efficacy of GraspSplats. Specifically, our
experiments aim to address the following research questions:
• Main Results — Why is GraspSplats preferable than existing NeRF- and point-based methods?
• Ablation Study — What were the design choices?
Experiment Protocol. We obtain calibration of all third-person cameras using Colmap [45] with
Aruco visual markers. For all settings, we first obtain an initial scan of the scene by programming
the arm to go in a Bezier curve defined by given waypoints. We provide object-part text queries for
all grasping experiments on the real robot. Though GraspSplats conceptually supports multi-camera
tracking, we only use a single RGB-D camera for tracking in experiments. Manipulation success
is defined as lifting the object (optionally, by the parts specified) for at least 3 seconds without
re-attempting. We provide the protocols of static and dynamic part-level manipulation below:
• Static zero-shot part-level manipulation. We experiment with 8 different re-arrangements of
objects (4 are cluttered, shown in Fig. 1) with 24 objects. We conducted 43 trials in total in
6

Method
Tracking Anything [46]
ConceptGraphs⋆ [24]
LERF-TOGO [2]
F3RM⋆ [1]
GraspSplats (Ours)

Latency↓
Training Grasping
—
3.1s
∼30s
0.7s
∼10min
9.9s
∼3min
1.6s
60s
1.3s

Grasping Success↑
Static Dynamic
41.9%
45%
51.1%
—†
65.1%
—†
72.1%
—†
81.4%
74.2%

Table 1: Comparison to NeRF and 2D-based methods on latency, static/dynamic successful
rate. Latencies are reported for (1) the time for (re)building the representation; and (2) grasp latency
given task texts. The reported success rates are averages of variations in motions and objects/parts.
⋆
: reproduced variants that use GraspNet [32, 33] on objects segmented by the underlying methods.
†
: methods require offline batch processing that does not cope with dynamic scenes.
this setting. The objects included kitchenware, tableware, toys, tools, and other commonly encountered items. We intentionally include many difficult cases such as part-level grasping and
challenging items.
• Dynamic zero-shot part-level manipulation. In the experiment, we used objects similar to static
grasping (40 trials of 24 objects per type). However, a human operator rearranges the specified
object after the initial scan. To specifically evaluate tracking performance, we experiment with
three types of dynamic motion:
– Easy. Objects are translated without rotation.
– Medium. Objects are rotated 180◦ , with some occlusions from hand during rotation.
– Hard. Objects are translated and rotated simultaneously, with certain occlusions.
4.1

Main Results

In the main results section, we compare GraspSplats with strong baselines including NeRF-based [2,
1] methods, 2D+Depth point-cloud based method [46], and scene-graph based method [24]. Specifically, We compare with two recent NeRF-based methods, LERF-TOGO [2] and F3RM [1]. Since
F3RM requires human demonstrations, we implement a zero-shot variant, F3RM∗ . F3RM∗ renders CLIP features and depth for segmentation and geometry, which uses GraspNet [32] to generate
grasps. In addition, for the 2D baseline, we use TrackAnything [46], which combines SAM [25]
and GroundingDINO [26] for segmentation. The foreground depth and images are used for building point-cloud, then jointly fused as input for GraspNet [32] to generate grasps. For the scenegraph-based method, we use ConceptGraphs [24] that leverages vision foundation models to build
interactable scene graphs for manipulation. The results for latency, and success rate for static and
dynamic scenes are shown in Table. 1. We claim the following advantages for GraspSplats:
Our approach is extremely faster than the NeRF-based methods. As shown in Table. 1, both
our training latency (the time for rebuilding the representation) and grasping latency are faster than
LERF-TOGO and F3RM. Specifically, our training latency is 10x faster than LERF-TOGO, and 3x
faster than F3RM. While with supreme efficiency, our approach also has a better static scene success
rate with 16.3 points better than LERF-TOGO, and 9.3 points better than F3RM.
With comparable latency with 2D and Scene-Graph based method, our approach doubled the
success rate. 2D-based approach is usually fast and generalizable while using 2D perception and
depth map to build the point cloud for grasping and manipulation. Here, we compared with baseline TrackAnything powered by GraspNet for manipulation in both static and dynamic scenes. In
static scenes, TrackAnything fails on almost every part-level grasping trials, as its internal detection
model [26] was not trained on part-level data. In dynamic scenes, its success rate is approximately
same across different motion setups, as it is based on 2D object-level segmentation which again
fails on part-level experiments. The scene-graph-based method generates structured object-level
representations. By fusing multi-view images, it achieves slightly higher performance than TrackAnything [46], but still 21 points lower than our approach.
7

Method
⋆

Tracking Anything
ConceptGraph⋆
LERF-TOGO
F3RM
GraspSplats

Segment

Grasp Sampling

2.5 ± 0.1s
0.1 ± 0.05s
5.1 ± 0.3s
1.0 ± 0.1s
0.8 ± 0.1s

0.6 ± 0.05s
0.6 ± 0.05s
4.8 ± 0.7s
6.9 ± 0.45s
0.5 ± 0.06s

Table 2: Grasping latency breakdown. standard
deviations are reported over 10 runs. ⋆ : our own
reproductions that use GPG [16] for grasping.

Method

Query Time↓

Succ.↑

GraspNet-100 [2]
10.3s
76.7%
GraspNet-1 [32]
0.6s
65.1%
F3RM [1]
6.9s
—
GraspSplats
0.5s
81.4%
Table 3: Query time and success rate
of different grasp sampling methods measured in the static scene. LERF-TOGO [2]
uses multi-view inferences that require 100
GraspNet passes.

Our method has supreme capabilities for accurate dynamic scene modeling. GraspSplats exploits the benefit of explicit representations, which allows editing reconstructed representations
without compromising the rich geometric and semantic scene features. We demonstrate that our
real-time tracking algorithm allows displacing reconstructed objects effectively, which works in dynamic scenes with a high success rate. This would otherwise be a challenging scenario for implicit
methods. Additionally, our approach reconstructs scenes with greater detail than 2D-based methods,
resulting in a higher success rate in dynamic scenarios.
4.2

Empirical Insights

Comparison to 2D segmentation. While we empirically observe that 2D open-vocabulary segmentation models [26, 47, 46] achieve similar object-level segmentation accuracy to GraspSplats,
they fall short in part-level segmentation, which is crucial for part-level task-oriented manipulation
(e.g., TrackAnything [46] segments mugs but often fail to segment handle of the mug). In addition,
without a consistent 3D representation, it fails if the part to manipulate is out of sight to the camera.
Comparison to NeRF-based methods. Although NeRF-based methods demonstrate better performance on static scenes than 2D projection methods, they are fundamentally implicit, which leads
to failure when objects are displaced by external forces. In addition, the implicit representation also
requires costly training from random initialization, slow segmentation, and grasping query time.
Finally, F3RM [1] and LERF-TOGO [2] fall short under cluttered scenes with object overlapping
without regularizing the object boundary in the reference feature.
4.3

Ablation Study

Reference Feature. As shown in Table. 4, we verify the effectiveness of
Method
IoU↑
our hierarchical features by using the mean IoU of 2D open-vocabulary
LERF
[6]
39.0
segmentation. Specifically, since there are no existing scene-scale partGraspSplats
50.7
level segmentation datasets, we manually annotate object-level and partlevel masks for 4 scenes and render CLIP features for binary masks with Table 4: object/part IoU
MaskCLIP [15]. The results in Table. 4 show that GraspSplats outperforms LERF [6] on both
object-level and part-level segmentation on average with 11.7 points higher on object IoU.
Grasp Sampling. We ablate different grasping methods in Table. 3. GraspNet-n represents the
grasps accumulated after running GraspNet [32] n times on point clouds from different viewpoints,
following the approach in the work[2]. GraspSplats demonstrates superior stability and speed compared to GraspNet, owing to its reliance on sampling methods. The research finding is that, if the
semantic affordance can be satisfactorily provided by the representation, then only geometrically informed sampling needs to be performed. In addition, unlike end-to-end methodologies [32], GraspSplats consistently retains crucial grasps even in complex scenes with incomplete 3D geometry. We
report the grasp optimization time F3RM [1] using its reported number; hence, since demonstrations
are required, the success rate of F3RM [1] is not applicable.
Meanwhile, we show the grasp sampling breakdown for segmentation and grasping in Table. 2.
Segmentation time represents the time from object/part text queries are provided to select the correct
8

Method

Process Time↓

Train Iteration ↓

Method

Object-level

Part-level

Colmap-S [12]
Colmap-D [48]
GraspSplats

11.6
623.0
0.7

10,000
3,000
3,000

LERF-TOGO [2]
F3RM⋆ [1]
GraspSplats

81.5%
85.2%
96.3%

63.0%
77.8%
85.2%

Table 5: Comparison of different initialization
schemes. Processing time is averaged across 4
scenes. Train iteration reports the updates needed
for convergence in increments of 1,000.

Table 6: Analysis of object-level and partlevel grasping success rate under static
scenes. Note that this table is computed using 27 object-part pairs different from the
runs presented in Table. 1.

part for grasping and grasp sampling time represents grasp pose selection after the part is localized.
It is clearly shown in the Table. 2, our approach is very efficient in both segmentation and grasping.
Initialization from Depth. In Table. 5, we ablate the effect of geometric regularization by comparing several variants to initialize geometry for Gaussian. In particular, while the original Gaussian
Splatting [12] paper adopts sparse Colmap [45] initialization from RGB images (Colmap-S); some
recent works have found that dense Colmap reconstruction (Colmap-D) serves as a better initialization that results in faster convergence [48]. GraspSplats adopt geometric regularization and directly
initializes centers of Gaussians using depth inputs, which leads to much more efficient training.
Success Rate Breakdown. As shown in Table. 6, to more clearly demonstrate the comparison of
part-level segmentation capabilities, we tested the success rates of 27 object-part pairs in unclustered
scenes, which differs from Table. 1. It clearly shows that our approach has nearly a 100% success
rate on object-level grasping while maintaining a very high success rate on part-level grasping. This
is a benefit from both the feature-enhanced 3D Gaussians and part-level supervision from SAM.
4.4

Qualitative Results

Fig. 4 demonstrates the qualitative performance of the GraspSplats system in executing zero-shot
tasks in real-world environments. The tasks involve various object-part text queries, such as tracking a yellow ball, resetting a yellow truck, and opening a cabinet door to grasp a pineapple. GraspSplats effectively samples grasp poses and executes grasping and heuristic trajectories based on
these queries. The images sequentially showcase the scene change, grasp pose sampling, and the
successful execution of the required task, highlighting the system’s ability to perform complex manipulations in diverse environments without prior specific training on these tasks.
4.5

Failure Cases Analysis

In static scenes, the system effectively segments objects, though challenges arise when objects are
very similar, leading to segmentation failures. Most task failures stem from execution issues, like
collisions during lifting, which require more advanced planning beyond our current scope. Additionally, while the system can place objects with the same orientation as grasped, real-world scenarios
often involve object rotation during grasping, complicating the placement due to limited perception
caused by the gripper obstructing the view. In dynamic scenes, the success of grasping relies heavily on accurate tracking. Objects with complex textures and asymmetry are easier to track, while
single-color or symmetric objects pose significant challenges, often resulting in tracking failures
during long-term or rapid movements. Enhancing tracking accuracy, especially through re-sampling
keypoints during tasks, will be a focus of future research.

5

Conclusion

In this work, we present GraspSplats, a novel representation for efficient part-based zero-shot manipulation. Using hierarchical features, geometric regularization, and grasp sampling, GraspSplats
are efficient in both optimizing feature-enhanced 3D representations and supporting grasp queries
via language. We further enhance GraspSplats with point trackers to directly edit optimized representation to capture the dynamics of objects — outperform implicit NeRF-based methods. The
results are validated on a real robot for tabletop manipulation under diverse settings.
9

Track yellow ball and reset it to the serve point.

Reset yellow truck if it stops.

Open the cabinet door by the gray handle, and grasp the pineapple.
Figure 4: Qualtative examples of GraspSplats performing zero-shot task execution in real-world environments. Given object-part text queries (italicized in the task description), GraspSplats executes
grasping followed by heuristic trajectories. From left to right each row: illustration of scene change;
grasp poses sampled by GraspSplats; execution of grasping. Animated visualization can be found
on the website.
Limitations. We highlight the most pronounced limitations to facilitate future research. The current
object corresponding algorithm based on the Kabsch [44] algorithm assumes that objects undergo
rigid transformation. While the Gaussian representation is conceptually applicable to more general
deformable objects (e.g., dough and clay), this is not investigated in the current work. In addition,
the tracking is sensitive to fast rotation and the resulting visual occlusions and motion blurs, which
could be potentially addressed as an optimization problem using semantic and geometric priors fused
in GraspSplats without assuming consistent object views.

References
[1] W. Shen, G. Yang, A. Yu, J. Wong, L. P. Kaelbling, and P. Isola. Distilled feature fields enable
few-shot language-guided manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2023.
[2] A. Rashid, S. Sharma, C. M. Kim, J. Kerr, L. Y. Chen, A. Kanazawa, and K. Goldberg. Language embedded radiance fields for zero-shot task-oriented grasping. In Conference on Robot
Learning. PMLR, 2023.
[3] S. Kobayashi, E. Matsumoto, and V. Sitzmann. Decomposing nerf for editing via feature field
distillation. NeurIPS, 2022.
[4] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell,
P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML. PMLR, 2021.
[5] W. Huang, C. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wu, and L. Fei-Fei. Voxposer: Composable 3d
value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. In Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023.
[6] J. Kerr, C. M. Kim, K. Goldberg, A. Kanazawa, and M. Tancik. Lerf: Language embedded
radiance fields. In ICCV, 2023.
10

[7] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and R. Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
[8] P. R. Florence, L. Manuelli, and R. Tedrake. Dense object nets: Learning dense visual object
descriptors by and for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08756, 2018.
[9] L. Manuelli, W. Gao, P. Florence, and R. Tedrake. kpam: Keypoint affordances for categorylevel robotic manipulation. In The International Symposium of Robotics Research, pages 132–
157. Springer, 2019.
[10] A. Simeonov, Y. Du, A. Tagliasacchi, J. B. Tenenbaum, A. Rodriguez, P. Agrawal, and V. Sitzmann. Neural descriptor fields: Se (3)-equivariant object representations for manipulation. In
2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6394–6400. IEEE,
2022.
[11] L. Yen-Chen, P. Florence, J. T. Barron, T.-Y. Lin, A. Rodriguez, and P. Isola. Nerf-supervision:
Learning dense object descriptors from neural radiance fields. In 2022 international conference
on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 6496–6503. IEEE, 2022.
[12] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkühler, and G. Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 2023.
[13] G. Chen and W. Wang. A survey on 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03890,
2024.
[14] C. Zhang, D. Han, S. Zheng, J. Choi, T.-H. Kim, and C. S. Hong. Mobilesamv2: Faster
segment anything to everything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09579, 2023.
[15] C. Zhou, C. C. Loy, and B. Dai. Extract free dense labels from clip. In ECCV, 2022.
[16] A. Ten Pas, M. Gualtieri, K. Saenko, and R. Platt. Grasp pose detection in point clouds. The
International Journal of Robotics Research, 2017.
[17] M. Gualtieri, A. Ten Pas, K. Saenko, and R. Platt. High precision grasp pose detection in dense
clutter. In 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2016.
[18] N. Karaev, I. Rocco, B. Graham, N. Neverova, A. Vedaldi, and C. Rupprecht. Cotracker: It is
better to track together. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07635, 2023.
[19] P. Liu, Y. Orru, C. Paxton, N. M. M. Shafiullah, and L. Pinto. Ok-robot: What really matters
in integrating open-knowledge models for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12202, 2024.
[20] B. Chen, F. Xia, B. Ichter, K. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan, M. S. Ryoo, A. Stone, and D. Kappler.
Open-vocabulary queryable scene representations for real world planning. In ICRA, 2023.
[21] C. Huang, O. Mees, A. Zeng, and W. Burgard. Visual language maps for robot navigation. In
ICRA, 2023.
[22] K. M. Jatavallabhula, A. Kuwajerwala, Q. Gu, M. Omama, T. Chen, A. Maalouf, S. Li, G. Iyer,
S. Saryazdi, N. Keetha, et al. Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d mapping. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.07241, 2023.
[23] N. H. Yokoyama, S. Ha, D. Batra, J. Wang, and B. Bucher. Vlfm: Vision-language frontier
maps for zero-shot semantic navigation. In ICRA, 2024.
[24] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen, A. Agarwal, C. Rivera,
W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa, et al. Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs
for perception and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16650, 2023.
11

[25] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead,
A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, et al. Segment anything. In ICCV, 2023.
[26] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, et al. Grounding
dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.
[27] R.-Z. Qiu, Y. Hu, G. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Fu, J. Ye, J. Mu, R. Yang, N. Atanasov, S. Scherer,
et al. Learning generalizable feature fields for mobile manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.07563, 2024.
[28] Y. Wang, Z. Li, M. Zhang, K. Driggs-Campbell, J. Wu, L. Fei-Fei, and Y. Li. D3 fields:
Dynamic 3d descriptor fields for zero-shot generalizable robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16118, 2023.
[29] J. Kerr, L. Fu, H. Huang, Y. Avigal, M. Tancik, J. Ichnowski, A. Kanazawa, and K. Goldberg.
Evo-nerf: Evolving nerf for sequential robot grasping of transparent objects. In Proceedings
of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, 2023.
[30] J. Redmon and A. Angelova. Real-time grasp detection using convolutional neural networks.
In ICRA, 2015.
[31] J. Mahler, J. Liang, S. Niyaz, M. Laskey, R. Doan, X. Liu, J. Aparicio, and K. Goldberg. Dexnet 2.0: Deep learning to plan robust grasps with synthetic point clouds and analytic grasp
metrics. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2017.
[32] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu. Graspnet-1billion: A large-scale benchmark for
general object grasping. In CVPR, 2020.
[33] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, H. Fang, M. Gou, J. Liu, H. Yan, W. Liu, Y. Xie, and C. Lu. Anygrasp:
Robust and efficient grasp perception in spatial and temporal domains. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 2023.
[34] M. Sundermeyer, A. Mousavian, R. Triebel, and D. Fox. Contact-graspnet: Efficient 6-dof
grasp generation in cluttered scenes. In ICRA, 2021.
[35] A. Mousavian, C. Eppner, and D. Fox. 6-dof graspnet: Variational grasp generation for object
manipulation. In ICCV, 2019.
[36] M. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Cheng, Y. Ji, R.-Z. Qiu, R. Yang, and X. Wang. Visual whole-body control
for legged loco-manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16967, 2024.
[37] S. Zhou, H. Chang, S. Jiang, Z. Fan, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, P. Chari, S. You, Z. Wang, and A. Kadambi.
Feature 3dgs: Supercharging 3d gaussian splatting to enable distilled feature fields. In CVPR,
2024.
[38] R.-Z. Qiu, G. Yang, W. Zeng, and X. Wang. Feature splatting: Language-driven physics-based
scene synthesis and editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01223, 2024.
[39] M. Qin, W. Li, J. Zhou, H. Wang, and H. Pfister. Langsplat: 3d language gaussian splatting. In
CVPR, 2024.
[40] Y. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. Zheng, S. Gu, R. Yang, B. Jin, P. Li, C. Zhong, Z. Wang, L. Liu, et al.
Gaussiangrasper: 3d language gaussian splatting for open-vocabulary robotic grasping. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.09637, 2024.
[41] Y. Li and D. Pathak. Object-aware gaussian splatting for robotic manipulation. In ICRA 2024
Workshop on 3D Visual Representations for Robot Manipulation, 2014.
12

[42] Y. Fu, S. Liu, A. Kulkarni, J. Kautz, A. A. Efros, and X. Wang. Colmap-free 3d gaussian
splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07504, 2023.
[43] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for discovering
clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd, 1996.
[44] W. Kabsch. A solution for the best rotation to relate two sets of vectors. Acta Crystallographica
Section A: Crystal Physics, Diffraction, Theoretical and General Crystallography, 1976.
[45] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm. Structure-from-motion revisited. In CVPR, 2016.
[46] H. K. Cheng, S. W. Oh, B. Price, A. Schwing, and J.-Y. Lee. Tracking anything with decoupled
video segmentation. In ICCV, 2023.
[47] T. Ren, S. Liu, A. Zeng, J. Lin, K. Li, H. Cao, J. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Chen, F. Yan, et al.
Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.
[48] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and X. Wang. 4d gaussian
splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08528, 2023.
[49] A. Singh, J. Sha, K. S. Narayan, T. Achim, and P. Abbeel. Bigbird: A large-scale 3d database
of object instances. In ICRA, 2014.
[50] C. Chi, Z. Xu, C. Pan, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, S. Feng, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Universal
manipulation interface: In-the-wild robot teaching without in-the-wild robots. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.10329, 2024.

13

A

Part-level Features Determination

Given object-level bounding boxes, we crop and wrap images to square patches to obtain CLIP
features. After per-patch features are computed, we create a part-level feature map by aggregating
per-patch features using the inverse function of the cropping and wrapping process. For pixels that
are assigned with more than two feature vectors, the features are averaged. Pixels with no assigned
features are ignored during rendering-based feature distillation.

B

Object-level CLIP Queries

Specifically, GraspSplats follows standard CLIP querying practices [1, 6, 2, 38] and takes a positive vocabulary with negative vocabularies. By default, the negative vocabularies include canonical
words (i.e., ‘objects’ and ‘things’), but can be optionally extended with user queries. To be specific,
−
−
+
+
given a language set L = {L−
0 , L1 , . . . , Ln , L } containing n + 1 words, where L is the positive
query and the remaining L− are negative queries. The CLIP model is used to encode each word Li
into a 768-dimensional feature vector Ftext,i ∈ R768 :
Ftext,i = CLIP encode(Li ),

i = 0, 1, . . . , n

For each Gaussian primitive j, there is a 16-dimensional view-independent feature vector Flatent,j ∈
R16 This is decoded into a 768-dimensional CLIP feature representation FCLIP,j ∈ R768 :
FCLIP,j = Decoder(Flatent,j )
Then, we calculate the cosine similarity between its CLIP feature representation FCLIP,j and each
query Li in the set L :
sim(FCLIP,j , Ftext,i ) =

FCLIP,j · Ftext,i
∥FCLIP,j ∥∥Ftext,i ∥

Then, we apply a softmax function to the similarities between it and all queries Li to enhance the
similarity for the positive query:
Sj = softmax({sim(FCLIP,j , Ftext,i )}ni=0 )
Here, Sj is the similarity vector for Gaussian primitive j. After applying a temperature softmax, the
similarity for the positive query L+ is selected:
simpositive,j = Sj [n]
The selecting Gaussians whose similarity to L+ passes a certain threshold τ = 0.6 will be regarded
as the grasping object. After Gaussians are selected, we apply the DBSCAN [43] clustering algorithm to filter out outliers.

C

Reference Feature Computation

Following [14], Dobj achieves high recall by intentionally including more false positives, which
ensures recall of objects. MobileSAMV2 [14] then uses Dobj as priors to generate object-level
segmentation masks {M}.
To generate object-level features, For a given object mask M, we use Masked Average Pooling
(MAP) to aggregate an object-level feature vector
P
FC (i)
i∈FC M(i) · ||FC (i)||
P
wi = MAP(M, FC ) =
,
(3)
i∈FC M(i)
14

where i is a pixel coordinate. We then construct Fobj by assigning w.
To generate part-level features, for a given bounding box, we crop and wrap the patches to (224,
224). The image patch is then processed by MaskCLIP to generate feature map of shape (28, 28,
768). We then interpolate the generated feature map to match the size of the original bounding box,
and paste it onto the part-level feature map. If a pixel is assigned more than one feature, we average
all assigned features.

D

Grasp Sampling Algorithm

We define F (p) = [v3 (p)v2 (p)v1 (p)] as the orthogonal reference frame at point p where
v1 (p), v2 (p), v3 (p), correspond to the normal direction, the secondary direction, and the minimum
direction of M (p). We search a 2D grid G = Y × Φ. For each (y, ϕ) ∈ G, we apply translations and
rotations relative to F (p), then push the gripper along the negative x-axis until a finger or the base
of the gripper contacts the point cloud. Let Tx,y,ϕ be the homogeneous transformation describing
translations in the x, y plane and rotation about the z-axis. The gripper hy,ϕ at grid cell y, ϕ contacts
the point cloud at: F (hy,ϕ ) = F (p)Tx∗ ,y,ϕ , where x∗ is the minimum distance along the negative
x-axis at which the gripper contacts the point cloud. If the number of segmented objects Nobj within
the gripper’s closed region exceeds a set threshold Nth , i.e., Nobj > Nth , the gripper hy,ϕ is added
to the candidate grasp set H. Finally, we use a geometry-aware scoring model [17, 49] to rank the
grasps and select the grasp pose with the highest score.

E

Analysis of Failure Cases of GraspSplats.

Though GraspSplats achieves an overall good success rate in static scenes, its performance degrades
as the object becomes more dynamic. We find that GraspSplats copes with translation motion well.
Empirically, the speed at which the object is translated does not significantly impact the accuracy
of the deformation. GraspSplats degrades when the object undergoes drastic rotation, which causes
occlusions and loss of correspondence.

F

Hardware Configuration

We use the Franka Research robot (FR3) as the main experiment platform. In addition to one Intel
Realsense D435 cameras mounted on the end effector, we also use inputs from two third-person
view Intel Realsense D435 cameras to facilitate scene reconstruction. We use the UMI gripper [50]
as the end effector. The arm and cameras are connected to a desktop computer with a single RTX
4090 and an Intel i9-13900k CPU, on which GraspSplats is deployed.

G

Multi-state Task Policy Rollout

The examples of complex tasks are designed to illustrate potential use cases rather than showcase
highly intricate operations. The tasks primarily focus on object manipulation, such as updating
an object’s position, grasping, resetting, and pick-and-place actions. For instance, in the toy car
experiment in the supplementary video, after grasping the car, the robot resets the car by placing it
back in its original position with the same orientation. During pick-and-place tasks, the placement
orientation is aligned with the grasping orientation, and the placement location is determined by
querying the center of another object.
These operations highlight the system’s capabilities in basic object manipulation. However, challenges arise in tasks that involve precise placement, especially when the object’s orientation shifts
during grasping due to the inherent instability or rotation caused by the gripper’s contact. This issue
is particularly evident when the gripper obstructs the view of the object, complicating the perception
of the object’s orientation during placement. These challenges and potential failure cases are further
discussed in the supplementary material.
15

