Tencent Hunyuan

P3 -SAM: NATIVE 3D PART S EGMENTATION
∗

Changfeng Ma1,2 , Yang Li1, , Xinhao Yan1,3 , Jiachen Xu1 , Yunhan Yang1,4 ,
†

Chunshi Wang1,5 , Zibo Zhao1 , Yanwen Guo2 , Zhuo Chen1 , Chunchao Guo1,
1
Tencent Hunyuan, 2 NJU, 3 ShanghaiTech, 4 HKU, 5 ZJU

A BSTRACT

arXiv:2509.06784v4 [cs.CV] 25 Sep 2025

Segmenting 3D assets into their constituent parts is crucial for enhancing 3D understanding, facilitating model reuse, and supporting various applications such as
part generation. However, current methods face limitations such as poor robustness when dealing with complex objects and cannot fully automate the process.
In this paper, we propose a native 3D point-promptable part segmentation model
termed P3 -SAM, designed to fully automate the segmentation of any 3D objects
into components. Inspired by SAM, P3 -SAM consists of a feature extractor, multiple segmentation heads, and an IoU predictor, enabling interactive segmentation
for users. We also propose an algorithm to automatically select and merge masks
predicted by our model for part instance segmentation. Our model is trained on
a newly built dataset containing nearly 3.7 million models with reasonable segmentation labels. Comparisons show that our method achieves precise segmentation results and strong robustness on any complex objects, attaining state-of-theart performance. Our project page is available at https://murcherful.github.io/P3SAM/.

Figure 1: P3 -SAM produces precise part segmentation results for any object.

∗
†

Project Leader
Corresponding Author

1

Tencent Hunyuan

1

I NTRODUCTION

As a fundamental 3D version task, the segmentation of 3D assets plays a crucial role in shape
analysis, editing, and reuse, as well as other downstream tasks such as mesh simplification and
animation design Zhang et al. (2025). Many works have been proposed to address 3D segmentation
and have achieved notable success, but there are still challenges in this task.
Traditional learning-based segmentation methods attempt to segment 3D point clouds using predefined part categories, relying on direct supervision from part labels. They can only segment certain
parts within specific categories and struggle to handle objects with arbitrary parts. To this end, recent
works Yang et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2024) leverage the capabilities of the 2D
SAM Kirillov et al. (2023) by lifting 2D segmentation results to serve as 3D segmentation ground
truth for training 3D segmentation models. However, due to the significant data gap between 2D and
3D, these methods suffer from imprecise results and lack strong robustness when dealing with arbitrarily complex objects. Additionally, they are still one step away from full automatic segmentation,
as they require users to provide the number of parts or prompt points.
In this paper, we propose a native 3D Point-Promptable Part segmentation model termed P3 -SAM,
designed to fully automate the segmentation of any complex 3D objects into components with precise mask and strong robustness. The improvements and differences of our method compared to
previous methods are summarized in Table1. As a pioneering promptable image segmentation work,
SAM provides a feasible implementation approach. However, our method focuses on achieving precise part segmentation automatically, and we simplify the architecture of SAM. Without adopting
the complex segmentation decoder and multiple types of prompts from SAM, our model is designed
to handle only one positive point prompt. Specifically, P3 -SAM contains a feature extractor, three
segmentation heads, and an IoU prediction head. We employ PointTransformerV3 Wu et al. (2024;
2025) as our feature extractor and integrate its features from different levels as extracted point-wise
features. The input point prompt and feature are fused and passed to the segmentation heads to
predict three multi-scale masks and an IoU predictor is utilized to evaluate the quality of the masks.
To automatically segment an object, we apply our segmentation model using point prompts sampled
by FPS and utilize NMSGirshick et al. (2014) to filter redundant masks. The point-level masks are
then projected onto mesh faces to obtain the part segmentation results.
Another key aspect of this paper is to eliminate the influence of 2D SAM, and rely exclusively
on raw 3D part supervision for training a native 3D segmentation model. While existing 3D part
segmentation datasets are either too small (e.g. PartNet Mo et al. (2019)) or lack part annotation (e.g.
Objaverse Deitke et al. (2022)), this work addresses the data scarcity by developing an automated
part annotation pipeline for artist-created meshes and used it to generate a dataset comprising 3.7
million meshes with high-quality part-level masks. Our model demonstrates excellent scalability
with this dataset and achieves robust, precise, and globally coherent part segmentation.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
part segmentation for any parts of any objects, especially on complex objects with highly detailed
geometry, as shown in Figure1. The main contributions of our P3 -SAM are summarized as follows:
• We propose a native 3D point-promptable part segmentation model to segment any parts of
any objects.
• We propose a fully automatic part segmentation approach using our model and a mask
merging algorithm.
• With high accuracy, generalization, and robustness across various tasks and data types, our
method can be applied to interactive, multi-head and hierarchical part segmentation.

2

R ELATED W ORK

2.1

T RADITIONAL 3D PART S EGMENTATION

Traditional 3D part segmentation methods usually train their networks on specific part labels from
object or scene datasets, such as PartNet Mo et al. (2019), Princeton Mesh Segmentation Chen et al.
(2009), ScanNet Dai et al. (2017), and S3DIS Armeni et al. (2016). These methods employ point
2

Tencent Hunyuan

Table 1: The comparison of our method with related works across several key aspects, including the
number and type of training data, the number of parameters, the time cost for full and interactive
segmentation, and the ability to automatically segment objects.
Methods

Data Num.

Data Type

Param.

Time(Seg.)

Time(Inter.)

Auto.

SAMesh
Find3D
SAMPart3D
ParField
Point-SAM

30K
200K
360K
100K

2D Lifting
2D Data Engine
2D Data Engine
2D Data Engine
2D Data Engine

46M
114M
106M
311M

∼7min
∼10s
∼15min
∼10s
-

∼5ms

Ë
é
é
é
é

Ours

3.7M

3D Native

112M

∼8s

∼3ms

Ë

cloud encoders like PointNet Qi et al. (2017) and PointTransformerV3 (PTv3) Wu et al. (2024)
or mesh encoders like MeshCNN Hanocka et al. (2019) and Mesh Transformer (Met) Zhou et al.
(2023a) to extract 3D features for the segmentation head to predict part labels. However, traditional methods suffer from limited categories and part labels and struggle to generalize to arbitrary
categories and parts.

2.2

2D L IFTING 3D PART S EGMENTATION

In addition to segmenting parts with semantic meaning, recent works aim to segment out geometrically significant parts. With the development of 2D foundation models, significant progress has
been made by models such as CLIP Radford et al. (2021), GLIP Li et al. (2022), SAM Kirillov
et al. (2023), Dinov2 Oquab et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2024) and VLM Team (2025) in image-text
alignment and zero-shot detection and segmentation. Rendering 3D models into multi-view images and leveraging these 2D foundation models for lifting 2D capabilities to 3D is an obvious
but effective approach. Recent methods, such as SAMesh Tang et al. (2024), SAM3D Yang et al.
(2023) and SAMPro3D Xu et al. (2023), directly apply SAM to rendered 2D images and aggregate
multi-view masks to achieve class-agnostic segmentation for any 3D objects or scenes. Additionally, several methods Liu et al. (2023); Abdelreheem et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2023b); Xue et al.
(2023); Zhong et al. (2024); Umam et al. (2024); Garosi et al. (2025) utilize text descriptions of categories as prompts on 2D rendered images to enhance the querying of 3D parts. Directly lifting 2D
knowledge to 3D may encounter limitations such as data gaps, 3D consistency issues, and unstable
post-processing, leading to poor robustness and inaccurate segmentation results. Text-query-based
methods also require prompt engineering. Rendering multi-view images and using SAM or VLM to
process these images can also consume significant resources and time.

2.3

2D DATA E NGINE FOR 3D PART S EGMENTATION

To alleviate the 3D consistency issues and data gaps brought by directly lifting 2D knowledge, recent
works Peng et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2024); Ošep et al. (2024); Ma et al. (2024) attempt to use 2D
foundation models to build a data engine for training feed-forward networks on 3D point clouds and
meshes. SAMPart3D Yang et al. (2024) employs a network to distill the projected Dinov2 features
of point clouds. To achieve more accurate segmentation of each object, it then trains a lightweight
MLP for each object to predict segmentation masks by conducting contrastive learning on SAM
projections. Finally, a MLLM is utilized to annotate each part. PartField Liu et al. (2025) directly
supervises a network composed of a voxel CNN and a tri-plane transformer with contrastive learning
loss on both 2D and 3D masks, where the 2D masks are obtained using SAM. Point-SAM Zhou et al.
(2024) adapts SAM to 3D point clouds and utilizes SAM to design a data engine based on multiview images. This data engine continuously trains and refines a PointViT model to achieve part
segmentation based on prompt points. Although a 2D data engine can reduce 3D inconsistencies
and improve the network’s generalization ability, segmentation based on 2D data can still suffer
from boundary ambiguities and data gaps, leading to inaccurate segmentation results, especially on
complex data. Additionally, these methods either require specifying the number of categories or
need user-provided prompt points, which means they cannot fully automate object segmentation.
3

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 2: The Network Architecture of P3 -SAM. Input point clouds are fed to feature extractor to
obtain point-wise features. The features, point prompts, and original point clouds are then fed to a
two stage multi-mask segmentor to obtain three masks in various scales. Finally, the IoU predictor
is utilized to evaluate the quality of the masks and select the best one as the final prediction.

3

M ETHOD

Given the mesh M = (V, F ∈ NNf ×3 ) of an object, our goal is to predict a mask mpart ∈
{1, 2, 3, ..., Npart }Nf that segments each face into Npart parts, where Nf indicates the number of
faces and Np represents the number of parts for the object. Here, each part is instance-specific but
class-agnostic.
3.1

DATA C URATION

To construct our dataset, we aggregated 3D models from multiple sources, including Objaverse Deitke et al. (2022), Objaverse-XL Deitke et al. (2023), ShapeNet Chang et al. (2015), PartNet Mo et al. (2019), and other internet repositories. We filtered models containing reasonable part
information based on several simple criterions and obtained nearly 3.7 million objects. However,
these object models are non-watertight. Training on such data can lead to poor generalization on
watertight 3D models, such as scanned mesh or AI-generated ones. We then made nearly 2.3 million watertight models from the filtered data. During training, if a model has a watertight version,
we set an 80% probability of selecting the watertight data for training. This allows our network to
handle both watertight and non-watertight data.
3.2
3.2.1

P OINT-P ROMPTABLE PART S EGMENTATION M ODEL
N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

To achieve class-agnostic part segmentation for arbitrary objects, providing prompts related to parts
is more efficient than direct label supervision or contrastive learning. Previous methods utilize text
as prompts to query parts, while methods like SAM Kirillov et al. (2023) and Point-SAM Zhou et al.
(2024) use positive and negative prompt points or bounding boxes as prompts. To fully facilitate
the automatic part segmentation of objects using point-based prompts, we design our P3 -SAM to
segment a part using only a single point prompt. This allows the network to avoid adapting to diverse
prompts, simplifying the network and improving its convergence, generalization, and accuracy. The
input to our P3 -SAM consists of the point cloud P ∈ RNp ×3 and its normals N ∈ RNp ×3 sampled
from the input mesh M and a point p ∈ R3 as a prompt to indicate the part that needs to be
segmented. As shown in Figure 2, the architecture of our method consists of a feature extractor,
a two-stage multi-head segmentor, and an IoU predictor. Since our method only requires a single
point prompt, we directly input the prompt into the segmentor.
Feature Extractor. Recent point cloud encoders have achieved excellent results on various point
cloud tasks, especially Sonata Wu et al. (2025), a self-supervised pre-trained Point Transformer
V3 Wu et al. (2024). We then employ Sonata with its pre-trained weights as our feature extractor
4

Tencent Hunyuan

E to extract multi-scale features from point clouds. We then aggregate these multi-scale features
together and use an weight-shared MLP Fe to obtain point-wise features f , as shown in Figure 2,
fp = Fe (E(P, N)1 , E(P, N)2 , ..., E(P, N)n ), where the subscripts indicate features at different
scales. The point features need to be predicted only once and can be used for predicting part masks
with different point prompts.
Two-Stage Multi-Head Segmentor. Our part dataset, introduced in Section 3.1, integrates multiple data sources which may involve varying granularity and conflicting criteria for part separation.
Additionally, the point prompts might be ambiguous in indicating the specific scale of a part, as
mentioned in SAMKirillov et al. (2023). Therefore, we use a multi-head segmentor to predict
multiple alternative masks at various scales in order to mitigate this conflict and ambiguity. Our
(1)
multi-head segmentor contains a two-stage prediction process. In the first stage, three MLPs Fi
take a mixed input fin , including the point-wise features fp , the input points P and Np copies of the
(1)
(1)
(1)
point prompt p, to predict three different masks, mi = Fi (fin ) = Fi (fp , P, p), i = 1, 2, 3.
However, the first stage is a naive implementation that lacks support for global information. Therefore, in the second stage, we introduce a global feature and re-predict the three masks based on
the results from the first stage. As shown in the Figure2, we use an MLP Fg to predict pointwise features and apply max pooling along the point dimension. We utilize an MLP Fg to predict point-wise features, and apply max pooling along the point dimension to derive a global fea(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)
ture, fg = M axP ool(Fg (fin , m1 , m2 , m3 )). Finally, three new MLPs Fi are employed to
predict more accurate results based on the global features and the outcomes from the first phase,
(2)
(2)
(1)
(1)
(1)
mi = Fi (fin , fg , m1 , m2 , m3 ), i = 1, 2, 3. While the second stage optimizing the results
(1)
from the first stage, the initial masks mi also help the second stage to focus the extraction of global
features on the parts that need segmentation, making feature extraction more efficient and improves
the accuracy of segmentation results.
IoU Predictor. To achieve automatic identification of the best mask, we introduce an IOU predictor
(2)
(2)
(2)
to assess the quality of m1 , m2 , m3 and select the best mask as the network’s final prediction.
The assessment is achieved by directly predicting the IoU values of the predicted masks and the
′
ground truth masks. The IOU predictor first uses an MLP Fiou
and max pooling to obtain a global
feature from the global feature and three masks of second stage, and then employs another MLP
(2)
(2)
(2)
′
Fiou to predict three IoU values, v1 , v2 , v3 = Fiou (M axP ool(Fiou
(fin , fg , m1 , m2 , m3 ))).
The two-stage multi-head segmentor and IoU predictor are lightweight models capable of real-time
computation. Consequently, once the global feature of a given 3D model is extracted, our P3 -SAM
can be utilized for real-time interactive segmentation.
3.2.2

T RAINING

Data augmentation. To enhance the robustness of our network, we introduce random noise to the
input points P, normals N, and point prompts p during training. Furthermore, we randomly remove
normals with a probability of 0.3. We also mix watertight and non-watertight data, as mentioned in
Section 3.1.
Optimization Losses. During training, for a given model, we randomly select K part masks and
then randomly choose one point from the part points corresponding to each mask, resulting in K
(gt)
prompts pj ∈ R3 and K ground truth part masks mj ∈ {0, 1}Np , where j = 1, 2, ..., K. For the
three masks generated by the network in the first and second stages, we apply both Dice loss Ldice
and Focal loss Lf ocal for supervision. Backpropagation is applied only to the output with the lowest
loss, which encourages each segmentation head to predict masks at different scales. So, the mask
loss Lmask can be calculated as:
(t)

Lmask =

K

1 X 3 
(t)
(gt)
(t)
(gt)
min αdice Ldice (mij , mj ) + Lf ocal (mij , mj ) ,
K j=1 i=1

where αdice is a weighting parameter, and t = 1, 2 indicates whether the loss is computed for the
(2)
first or second stage of the network. To supervise the IoU, we first calculate the IoU between mij
5

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 3: Automatic Segmentation Pipeline. Point prompts are sampled by FPS and go through
the P3 -SAM to obtain multiple masks. NMS is then adopted to merge redundant masks. The pointlevel masks are then projected onto mesh faces to obtain the part segmentation results.
Table 2: The comparison of our method with previous methods on PartObj-Tiny. The first two
blocks represent class-agnostic part segmentation without and with connectivity, respectively, and
the last block represents interactive segmentation.
Task
Seg. w/o
Connect.

Seg. w/
Connect.
Interact.

(gt)

and mj

Method

Human

Animals

Daily

Build.

Trans.

Plants

Food

Elec.

AVG.

Find3D
SAMPart3D
PartField
Ours

23.99
55.03
54.52
60.77

23.99
57.98
58.07
59.43

22.67
49.17
56.46
62.98

16.03
40.36
42.47
50.82

14.11
47.38
49.09
57.72

21.77
62.14
59.16
70.53

25.71
64.59
55.4
54.04

19.83
51.15
56.29
61.96

21.28
53.47
53.93
59.88

SAMesh
PartField
Ours

66.03
80.85
80.77

60.89
83.43
86.46

56.53
77.83
80.97

41.03
69.66
67.77

46.89
73.85
68.44

65.12
80.21
90.30

60.56
85.27
92.90

57.81
82.30
81.52

56.86
79.18
81.14

Point-SAM
Ours

26.13
49.01

29.25
53.45

28.85
52.36

23.58
38.50

22.91
51.52

31.44
62.57

33.04
50.80

28.05
51.86

27.91
51.23

. We then use MSE to compute the loss based on these IoU values,
LIoU =

K
3


1 XX
(2)
(gt)
LM SE vij , IoU (I(mij ), mj ) ,
3K j=1 i=1

where I is an indicator function that indicates whether the mask value is greater than 0.5. The
overall loss is the sum of the mask losses from both the first and second stages and the IOU loss,
(1)
(2)
that is L = Lmask + Lmask + LIoU .
3.3

AUTOMATIC S EGMENTATION

Methods such as interactive segmentation, text prompt extraction, and clustering often require human intervention during the segmentation process. To achieve fully automatic segmentation, we
propose an automated approach based on our P3 -SAM, as shown in Figure 3. Our method begins
by sampling points P and normals N from given mesh M. Subsequently, we use Farthest Point
Sampling (FPS) to select Npp point prompts pj from P. After extracting features fp from P, we
predict a mask mj and an IoU value vj based on each point prompt pj utilizing our P3 -SAM. To ensure that each part can be segmented out, point prompts are always over-sampled, with their number
being significantly greater than the actual number of parts in the object. To obtain the true number
of parts, we use Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to filter out the numerous duplicate masks. We
first sort the masks in descending order according to their IoU values to form a candidate queue. We
take out the first mask and use it to filter out other masks in the queue that have an IoU greater than
TN M S with this mask. We repeat this process of selecting and filtering until no masks remain in the
queue. The set of all selected masks constitutes the final result of NMS. The part number Npart is
the number of the selected masks, and each mask has its own part label. According to which face
and mask each point belongs to, we assign the corresponding part labels to each face and determine
a final part label for each patch through voting. We use the flood fill algorithm to assign labels to
faces that do not have a label. Specifically, for each unlabeled face, we assign it the most frequent
label among its neighboring faces (or its nearest several faces if there is no connectivity in the mesh).
We repeat this process until all faces have been assigned a label and obtain the final mask mpart of
each faces in mesh M.
6

Tencent Hunyuan

Table 3: The comparison of various methods on PartObj-Tiny-WT.
Task

Fully Segmentation w/o Connectivity

Interactive Seg.

Method

Find3D

SAMPart3D

SAMesh

PartField

Ours

Point-SAM

Ours

PartObj-Tiny-WT
PartNetE

20.76
21.69

48.79
56.17

26.66

51.54
59.1

58.10
65.39

24.16
45.85

49.11
63.48

Figure 4: The comparison of our method across different tasks.

4

E XPERIMENTS

4.1

C OMPARISON

Evaluation Datasets. We evaluate each method on three datasets: PartObj-Tiny Yang et al. (2024),
PartObj-Tiny-WT, and PartNetE Liu et al. (2023). PartObj-Tiny-WT is the watertight version of
PartObj-Tiny for evaluation of the various networks on watertight data.
Tasks. There are three tasks: full segmentation without connectivity, full segmentation with connectivity, and interactive segmentation. The meshes in PartObj-Tiny are non-watertight, with each
face exhibiting strong connectivity, forming distinct connected components that are strongly correlated with the segmentation results. Introducing such connectivity may improve segmentation
performance. However, in real-world applications, the connectivity relationships of meshes are often chaotic or may not even exist. We then divide the full segmentation task into the first two tasks.
For watertight data and point clouds, there is no connectivity, so the second task does not apply.
Baseline Methods. We compare our P3 -SAM with recent related works including SAMesh Tang
et al. (2024), Find3D Ma et al. (2024), SAMPart3D Yang et al. (2024), ParField Liu et al. (2025) and
Point-SAM Zhou et al. (2024). More comparisons on different aspects, including time cost, number
of parameters, amount of training data, etc., are shown in Table 1.
7

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 5: The three applications of our method.
Metric. The evaluation metric for fully segmentation is the same as in previous work Liu et al.
(2025), using IoU to measure the accuracy of mask predictions. To evaluate the interactive segmentation, we sample 10 prompt points for each part, then measure the average IOU between the
predicted masks for all prompts of all parts and their corresponding ground truth masks.
Results. Table 2 shows the evaluation results of various methods on PartObj-Tiny across three tasks.
In the second task, the results for PartField Liu et al. (2025) are based on its original version, which
incorporates connected components as the basis for hierarchical clustering and selects the optimal
results from multiple levels. To ensure a fair comparison, we also introduced connected components
and used random prompts for each part. The detailed methodology can be found in Section A.5. In
the third task, since Point-SAM can only segment point clouds, we sample the point clouds from the
meshes for comparison. Note that our method is also capable of segmenting point clouds because
we do not require the connectivity of the mesh. The comparisons on PartObj-Tiny-WT and PartNetE
are shown in Table 3. Since watertight data and point clouds lack connectivity information, PartField’s performance is not as good as on non-watertight data. This again validates that our method
effectively learns the geometric features of objects. We also conduct a qualitative comparison of our
method and previous methods, as shown in Figure 4. Quantitative and qualitative comparison across
various datasets and tasks, involving different data forms such as non-watertight meshes, watertight
meshes, and point clouds, demonstrate the remarkable effectiveness, robustness and generalization
ability of our methods, confirming its superior performance under diverse conditions.
4.2

A PPLICATIONS

Multi-Prompts Auto-Segmentation. Our method can also segment the object given several point
prompts that indicate specific parts. As shown in Figure 5, the multi-prompts segmentation can
follow the user’s instructions. Compared to automatic segmentation, it can both extend unsegmented
regions, such as the horse’s body, and merge over-segmented regions, such as flower petals.
Hierarchical Part Segmentation. As shown in Figure 5, our hierarchical segmentation results
effectively aggregate different parts at various levels, validating the effectiveness of our feature
8

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 6: The ablation study of our method and the visualization of features.
Table 4: The comparison of four ablated methods and our full method on the test set of our dataset.
w/o Augmentation

w/ Augmentation

Ablation

Single-Head

Stage 1 Only

Stage 2 Only

Stage 1 + Stage 2

Full

mIoU

0.2801

0.4265

0.6647

0.7464

0.7906

extraction method in accurately representing the information of each part. Compared to the results
from PartField, our method’s aggregation better adheres to the relationships between parts.
Part Generation. Our results can also be applied to part generation Yang et al. (2025b); Yan et al.
(2025) as an instruction for splitting objects. Figure 5 demonstrates the exploded part generation
results of HoloPart Yang et al. (2025a) when given the segmentation masks from SAMPart3D Yang
et al. (2024) and ours. Our more accurate segmentation masks can significantly improve HoloPart’s
performance, helping it generate cleaner and more precise parts.
4.3

A BLATION S TUDY

We first conduct ablation studies on our network architecture. The feature extractor can be any point
cloud encoder, and we select the current state-of-the-art one that is Sonata. The IoU predictor is
critical for selecting the best mask; without it, our method cannot function properly. We then focus
on conducting ablation studies of our two-stage multi-head segmentor. As shown in Table 4, we
evaluate four ablated models and our full method on the test set of our dataset. The first model
contains only one segmentation head of the first stage. The second and third models respectively
include only the first and second stages. The fourth model includes both stages but is trained without
data augmentation. The last model is our full version. This progressive ablation study clearly
demonstrates the importance of each component in our method. Notably, the difference between the
second and third models is that the latter extracts a global feature during segmentation. The better
performance metrics of the third model highlight the importance of this global feature. As shown in
Figure 6, we also present the full segmentation results without using the NMS or flood fill algorithm
in our automatic segmentation approach. The results highlight the necessity of these two steps, as
without them, the segmentation masks are not complete, have unclear boundaries, and do not yield
a reasonable number of parts. Figure 6 also visualizes the point-wise features of objects. The results
show that for the same type of data, our method produces similar features for corresponding parts,
while our features can capture more detailed geometry compared to PartField, such as the eyes and
ears of the person on the right. This fully demonstrates the advantages of our method in extracting
accurate features.

5

L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we propose P3 -SAM, a native 3D part segmentation method. Our approach employs
Sonata to extract point-wise features and uses a two-stage multi-head segmentor to predict multiscale masks given a point prompt indicating a part. An IoU predictor is employed to evaluate and
select the best mask. We also propose an automatic segmentation approach using our P3 -SAM. We
train our model on 3.7 million models, resulting in a part segmentation method with high accuracy,
9

Tencent Hunyuan

generalization, and robustness across various tasks and data types. Our method is also flexible and
can be applied to multiple applications such as real-time interactive, hierarchical, or multi-prompt
part segmentation. We observe that our method may rely too heavily on the geometric information
of the object’s surface and lacks an understanding of the spatial volume of the object’s parts. This is
because our training data consists solely of surface point clouds. Therefore, future work may focus
on developing models with spatial segmentation capabilities to broaden their applicability to a wider
range of tasks.

R EFERENCES
Ahmed Abdelreheem, Ivan Skorokhodov, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Peter Wonka. Satr: Zero-shot
semantic segmentation of 3d shapes. In ICCV, 2023.
Iro Armeni, Ozan Sener, Amir R Zamir, Helen Jiang, Ioannis Brilakis, Martin Fischer, and Silvio
Savarese. 3d semantic parsing of large-scale indoor spaces. In CVPR, 2016.
Angel X. Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, Jianxiong Xiao, Li Yi, and Fisher Yu.
Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Xiaobai Chen, Aleksey Golovinskiy, and Thomas Funkhouser. A benchmark for 3d mesh segmentation. Acm transactions on graphics (tog), 2009.
Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias
Nießner. Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In CVPR, 2017.
Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig
Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08051, 2022.
Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati,
Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Eli VanderBilt, Aniruddha
Kembhavi, Carl Vondrick, Georgia Gkioxari, Kiana Ehsani, Ludwig Schmidt, and Ali Farhadi.
Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05663, 2023.
Marco Garosi, Riccardo Tedoldi, Davide Boscaini, Massimiliano Mancini, Nicu Sebe, and Fabio
Poiesi. 3d part segmentation via geometric aggregation of 2d visual features. In WACV, 2025.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 580–587, 2014. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.81.
Rana Hanocka, Amir Hertz, Noa Fish, Raja Giryes, Shachar Fleishman, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
Meshcnn: a network with an edge. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 38(4):1–12, 2019.
Rui Huang, Songyou Peng, Ayca Takmaz, Federico Tombari, Marc Pollefeys, Shiji Song, Gao
Huang, and Francis Engelmann. Segment3d: Learning fine-grained class-agnostic 3d segmentation without manual labels. In ECCV, 2024.
Team Hunyuan3D. Hunyuan3d 2.1: From images to high-fidelity 3d assets with production-ready
pbr material, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15442.
Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu Zhong,
Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image pretraining. In CVPR, 2022.
Minghua Liu, Yinhao Zhu, Hong Cai, Shizhong Han, Zhan Ling, Fatih Porikli, and Hao Su. Partslip:
Low-shot part segmentation for 3d point clouds via pretrained image-language models. In CVPR,
2023.
10

Tencent Hunyuan

Minghua Liu, Mikaela Angelina Uy, Donglai Xiang, Hao Su, Sanja Fidler, Nicholas Sharp, and Jun
Gao. Partfield: Learning 3d feature fields for part segmentation and beyond, 2025.
Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan
Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for
open-set object detection. In ECCV, 2024.
Ziqi Ma, Yisong Yue, and Georgia Gkioxari. Find any part in 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13550,
2024.
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J Guibas, and Hao
Su. Partnet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3d object understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 909–918, 2019.
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov,
Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning
robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
Aljoša Ošep, Tim Meinhardt, Francesco Ferroni, Neehar Peri, Deva Ramanan, and Laura Leal-Taixé.
Better call sal: Towards learning to segment anything in lidar. In ECCV, 2024.
Songyou Peng, Kyle Genova, Chiyu Jiang, Andrea Tagliasacchi, Marc Pollefeys, Thomas
Funkhouser, et al. Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open vocabularies. In CVPR, 2023.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets
for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. Highresolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022.
George Tang, William Zhao, Logan Ford, David Benhaim, and Paul Zhang. Segment any mesh:
Zero-shot mesh part segmentation via lifting segment anything 2 to 3d. arXiv:2408.13679, 2024.
Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805.
Ardian Umam, Cheng-Kun Yang, Min-Hung Chen, Jen-Hui Chuang, and Yen-Yu Lin. Partdistill:
3d shape part segmentation by vision-language model distillation. In CVPR, 2024.
Xiaoyang Wu, Li Jiang, Peng-Shuai Wang, Zhijian Liu, Xihui Liu, Yu Qiao, Wanli Ouyang, Tong
He, and Hengshuang Zhao. Point transformer v3: Simpler faster stronger. In CVPR, 2024.
Xiaoyang Wu, Daniel DeTone, Duncan Frost, Tianwei Shen, Chris Xie, Nan Yang, Jakob Engel,
Richard Newcombe, Hengshuang Zhao, and Julian Straub. Sonata: Self-supervised learning of
reliable point representations. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, pp. 22193–22204, 2025.
Mutian Xu, Xingyilang Yin, Lingteng Qiu, Yang Liu, Xin Tong, and Xiaoguang Han. Sampro3d:
Locating sam prompts in 3d for zero-shot scene segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17707,
2023.
Yuheng Xue, Nenglun Chen, Jun Liu, and Wenyun Sun. Zerops: High-quality cross-modal knowledge transfer for zero-shot 3d part segmentation. arXiv:2311.14262, 2023.
Xinhao Yan, Jiachen Xu, Yang Li, Changfeng Ma, Yunhan Yang, Chunshi Wang, Zibo Zhao, Zeqiang Lai, Yunfei Zhao, Zhuo Chen, and Chunchao Guo. X-part: high fidelity and structure
coherent shape decomposition, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.08643.
11

Tencent Hunyuan

Yunhan Yang, Xiaoyang Wu, Tong He, Hengshuang Zhao, and Xihui Liu. Sam3d: Segment anything
in 3d scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03908, 2023.
Yunhan Yang, Yukun Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Liangjun Lu, Xiaoyang Wu, Edmund Y Lam,
Yan-Pei Cao, and Xihui Liu. Sampart3d: Segment any part in 3d objects. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.07184, 2024.
Yunhan Yang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Yukun Huang, Zi-Xin Zou, Zhipeng Yu, Yangguang Li, YanPei Cao, and Xihui Liu. Holopart: Generative 3d part amodal segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07943, 2025a.
Yunhan Yang, Yufan Zhou, Yuan-Chen Guo, Zi-Xin Zou, Yukun Huang, Ying-Tian Liu, Hao Xu,
Ding Liang, Yan-Pei Cao, and Xihui Liu. Omnipart: Part-aware 3d generation with semantic decoupling and structural cohesion, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06165.
Longwen Zhang, Qixuan Zhang, Haoran Jiang, Yinuo Bai, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Bang:
Dividing 3d assets via generative exploded dynamics. ACM Trans. Graph., 44(4), July 2025.
ISSN 0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/3730840. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3730840.
Ziming Zhong, Yanyu Xu, Jing Li, Jiale Xu, Zhengxin Li, Chaohui Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Meshsegmenter: Zero-shot mesh semantic segmentation via texture synthesis. In ECCV, 2024.
Pengwei Zhou, Xiao Dong, Juan Cao, and Zhonggui Chen. Met: mesh transformer with an edge.
The Visual Computer, 39(8):3235–3246, 2023a.
Yuchen Zhou, Jiayuan Gu, Xuanlin Li, Minghua Liu, Yunhao Fang, and Hao Su. Partslip++: Enhancing low-shot 3d part segmentation via multi-view instance segmentation and maximum likelihood estimation. arXiv:2312.03015, 2023b.
Yuchen Zhou, Jiayuan Gu, Tung Yen Chiang, Fanbo Xiang, and Hao Su. Point-sam: Promptable
3d segmentation model for point clouds, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
17741.

A

A PPENDIX

A.1

T HE U SE OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS (LLMS)

All technical contributions, including the methodology, equations, and results, are solely the work
of the authors.
A.2

M ORE R ELATED W ORKS D ISCUSSION

In this section, we provide a more detailed introduction to related works and highlight the differences
between these existing methods and our proposed method.
A.2.1

T RADITIONAL 3D PART S EGMENTATION

Traditional 3D part segmentation methods usually train their networks on specific part labels from
object or scene datasets, such as PartNet Mo et al. (2019), Princeton Mesh Segmentation Chen et al.
(2009), ScanNet Dai et al. (2017), and S3DIS Armeni et al. (2016). These methods employ point
cloud encoders like PointNet Qi et al. (2017) and PointTransformerV3 (PTv3) Wu et al. (2024)
or mesh encoders like MeshCNN Hanocka et al. (2019) and Mesh Transformer (Met) Zhou et al.
(2023a) to extract 3D features for the segmentation head to predict part labels.
These methods require part labels with clear categories for training. However, labeling such detailed
information on a large scale is impractical, leading to traditional methods suffering from limited
categories and part labels, and struggling to generalize to arbitrary categories and parts. In this
paper, we focus more on class-agnostic part instance segmentation for arbitrary objects. Therefore,
traditional methods are not within our scope of consideration and comparison.
12

Tencent Hunyuan

A.2.2

2D L IFTING 3D PART S EGMENTATION

With the development of 2D foundation models, significant progress has been made by models such
as CLIP Radford et al. (2021), GLIP Li et al. (2022), SAM Kirillov et al. (2023), Dinov2 Oquab et al.
(2023) and VLM in image-text alignment and zero-shot detection and segmentation. Rendering 3D
models into multi-view images and leveraging these 2D foundation models for lifting 2D capabilities to 3D is an obvious but effective approach. Recent methods, such as SAMesh Tang et al. (2024),
SAM3D Yang et al. (2023) and SAMPro3D Xu et al. (2023), directly apply SAM to rendered 2D
images and aggregate multi-view masks to achieve class-agnostic segmentation for any 3D objects
or scenes. Additionally, several methods utilize text descriptions of categories as prompts on 2D
rendered images to enhance the querying of 3D parts. PartSLIP Liu et al. (2023) and SATR Abdelreheem et al. (2023) employ text prompts and GLIP Li et al. (2022) to detect parts, followed
by post-processing to segment parts on point clouds and meshes. Besides GLIP, PointSLIP++ Zhou
et al. (2023b) and ZeroPS Xue et al. (2023) also leverage SAM, achieving more precise segmentation
results. The MeshSegmenter Zhong et al. (2024) employs Stable Diffusion Rombach et al. (2022)
to generate textures for a mesh, enabling SAM Kirillov et al. (2023) and Grounding DINO Liu
et al. (2024) to clearly segment and detect parts. PartDistill Umam et al. (2024) utilizes 2D VisionLanguage Models for forward and backward knowledge distillation to achieve 3D part segmentation.
COPS Garosi et al. (2025) leverages Dinov2 Oquab et al. (2023) to project visual features onto 3D
point clouds and then uses a VLM for part segmentation.
Directly lifting 2D knowledge to 3D may encounter limitations such as data gaps, 3D consistency
issues, and unstable post-processing, leading to poor robustness and inaccurate segmentation results.
Text-query-based methods also require prompt engineering. Different from these methods, our native 3D method directly processes and trains on 3D objects, avoiding the introduction of 2D data and
eliminating the aforementioned data gap. Besides, all these methods require rendering 3D models.
For instance, SAMesh requires rendering 12 images at the vertices of an icosahedron. Rendering
multi-view images and using SAM or VLM to process these images can also consume significant resources and time. Again, our native 3D method does not require rendering images, and its inference
speed is significantly faster than these methods.
A.2.3

2D DATA E NGINE FOR 3D PART S EGMENTATION

To alleviate the 3D consistency issues and data gaps brought by directly lifting 2D knowledge,
recent works attempt to use 2D foundation models to build a data engine for training feed-forward
networks on 3D point clouds and meshes. OpenScene Peng et al. (2023) employs a feature extractor
to learn the CLIP features projected onto scene point clouds and uses text prompts to query these
features for segmentation. Segment3D Huang et al. (2024) and SAL Ošep et al. (2024) use feedforward networks to learn the projected masks of scene meshes and LiDAR data predicted by SAM,
and then use CLIP to assign categories to each part. Find3D Ma et al. (2024) trains a network
to segment objects given text prompts by building a data engine that allows the VLM to query
parts after SAM processes multi-view images. SAMPart3D Yang et al. (2024) employs a network
to distill the projected Dinov2 features of point clouds. To achieve more accurate segmentation
of each object, it then trains a lightweight MLP for each object to predict segmentation masks by
conducting contrastive learning on SAM projections. Finally, a MLLM is utilized to annotate each
part. PartField Liu et al. (2025) directly supervises a network composed of a voxel CNN and a
tri-plane transformer with contrastive learning loss on both 2D and 3D masks, where the 2D masks
are obtained using SAM. Point-SAM Zhou et al. (2024) adapts SAM to 3D point clouds and utilizes
SAM to design a data engine based on multi-view images. This data engine continuously trains and
refines a PointViT model to achieve part segmentation based on prompt points.
Although a 2D data engine can reduce 3D inconsistencies and improve the network’s generalization
ability, segmentation based on 2D data can still suffer from boundary ambiguities and data gaps,
leading to inaccurate segmentation results, especially on complex data. Additionally, these methods either require specifying the number of categories or need user-provided prompt points, which
means they cannot fully automate object segmentation. Find3D and SAMPart3D utilize rendered 2D
images of objects to build their data engines, while PartField and Point-SAM also leverage several
3D part segmentation datasets such as PartNet Mo et al. (2019) and ScanNet Dai et al. (2017). However, the availability of native 3D data is limited, which restricts the improvement in segmentation
performance. On the contrary, our method is trained exclusively on native 3D data, and the quantity
13

Tencent Hunyuan

of data we use is significantly larger than that of other methods. As a result, our approach can more
fully learn the geometric features of 3D objects and achieve better segmentation performance.
The difference between our method and PartField is that PartField uses a clustering approach after
extracting the features of the input, whereas our method employs a segmentation module and point
prompts. The difference between our method and Point-SAM lies in the following aspects:
• Point-SAM adapts the network structure of SAM to build a model suitable for point clouds.
However, extending 2D network structures to 3D is not always effective. Therefore, we
directly utilize the state-of-the-art methods for point cloud feature extraction as our feature extraction module and design subsequent components with the characteristics of point
cloud data in mind.
• Point-SAM places more emphasis on interactive segmentation, incorporating multiple
prompts and both positive and negative prompts into the prompt encoding. In contrast,
our method focuses on full segmentation of objects. Therefore, we only use a single point
prompt to allow the network to better concentrate on accurately segmenting the object and
to simplify subsequent automatic segmentation.
• As mentioned earlier, our method is trained exclusively on native 3D data, eliminating the
need to build a 2D-based data engine. This is a significant difference compared to PointSAM.
• Point-SAM still relies on manual point annotations to achieve full segmentation, while in
this paper, we also propose an automatic segmentation method for the full segmentation of
3D objects.
A.3

M ORE M ETHOD D ETAILS

Figure 7: Example of part merge.

Figure 8: Examples with too many parts (>50).
A.3.1

DATA C URATION D ETAILS

To construct our dataset, we aggregated 3D models from multiple sources, including Objaverse Deitke et al. (2022), Objaverse-XL Deitke et al. (2023), ShapeNet Chang et al. (2015), PartNet Mo et al. (2019), and other internet repositories. These 3D assets are primarily created by artists,
who craft 3D shapes part by part and then assemble them. Since the assembly process often does not
merge meshes of parts, we can reverse-engineer the part information from the asset. Specifically,
the complete mesh is first decomposed into sub-meshes based on connected components. Then we
calculate the surface area of each sub-mesh, and build adjacency graph between parts (we voxelize
14

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 9: Examples with imbalanced parts, the largest part cover more than 85% of the surface area.

Figure 10: Example of valid data.
the space with resolution of 128, two sub-meshes are considered adjacent if they share any voxel).
We iteratively merge small parts (with a surface area less than 1% of the total, Figure 7) with their
adjacent, larger parts. This bottom-up process continues until all parts exceed the 1% area threshold. After merging, we filter out objects that have too few (less than 2) or too many (more than 50,
Figure 8) parts. To prevent the impact of mask area imbalance, we filtered out objects with disproportionately large parts (where a single part occupies more than 85%, Figure 9) and objects with
a significant number of very small parts (where parts smaller than 1% in area collectively account
for more than 10% of the total area). After the aforementioned filtering steps, we obtain nearly 3.7
million objects, as shown in Figure 10. During training, we sample points Pnwt from the meshes
and record which part each point was sampled from. Therefore, the ground truth label Lnwt for each
sampled point is its corresponding part label.
However, these object models are non-watertight at the object-level, often containing internal structures and clear boundaries. Training solely on such data can lead to poor generalization on watertight
3D models, such as scanned mesh or AI-generated ones. We then made the filtered models watertight
Hunyuan3D (2025), resulting in nearly 2.3 million successfully watertight models. These watertight
models do not contain internal structures and only include the outer surfaces of the models. To obtain the ground truth labels Lwt of the points Pwt sampled from the watertight meshes of an object
in our dataset, we follow these steps. First, we sample points Pnwt from the non-watertight mesh
of the object, along with their corresponding ground truth labels Lnwt . Simultaneously, we sample
points Pwt from the watertight mesh of the same object. For each point pwt in Pwt , we find its
nearest neighbor pnwt in Pnwt . We then assign the label of pnwt to pwt , ensuring that each point
in Pwt has an accurate ground truth label Lwt . During training, if a model has a watertight version,
we set an 80% probability of selecting the watertight data for training. This allows our network to
handle both watertight and non-watertight data.
A.3.2

DATA AUGMENTATION D ETAILS

We first set the maximum scale of the noise smax to 0.01. For the augmentation of input points P
and normals N, we randomly select a scale s from (0, smax ) to simulate varying levels of point cloud
noise, thereby making our method more robust. Then, the points P and normals N are augmented
with noise as follows:
P′ = P + N (0, s),
N′
, N′ = N + N (0, s) ∗ 10.
N′′ =
||N′ ||
15

Tencent Hunyuan

The augmentation of prompt p is
p′ = p + N (0, smax ).
A.3.3

AUTOMATIC S EGMENTATION D ETAILS

Our automatic segmentation approach is shown in Algorithm 1 and the NMS for masks is shown in
Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 1 Automatic Segmentation
Input: Mesh M with Nf faces
Output: Mask mpart ∈ {1, 2, ..., Npart }Nf with Npart parts
1: Sample Np points P with normals N from M
2: Sample Npp prompt points pj from P using FPS
3: Extract point-wise feature fp from P and N using P3 -SAM
4: Predict Npp masks mj and IoU values vj based on pj using P3 -SAM
5: Filter masks mj using NMS and retain Npart masks
6:
Sort the masks mj and their corresponding IoU values vj in descending order based on the
IoU values.
7: Assign the Npart point masks mj to M with part labels
8: Fill the faces without labels using flood fill algorithm and produce the mask mpart

Algorithm 2 NMS
Input: Masks m = {m1 , m2 , ..., mn } and their corresponding IoU values v = {v1 , v2 , ..., vn }
Output: Masks m = {m1 , m2 , ..., mk }
1: Sort the masks m in descending order based on the IoU values v.
2: for Mask mi in masks m do
3:
for Other mask mj in masks m do
4:
if IoU (mi , mj ) > 0.9 then
5:
Remove mask mj
6:
end if
7:
end for
8: end for
A.3.4

I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

To better handle complex objects, we reduced the voxel size of the input to Sonata. The channel of
the point-wise feature fp is 512. The point number Np is set to 100, 000 during training, evaluation,
and inference. We randomly select K = 8 parts in the training process and set αdice to 0.5. For
automatic segmentation, we sample Npp = 400 prompts from points, and the threshold TN M S is
set to 0.9. Our network is trained on our dataset using 64 H20 for 9 epochs. We set the batch size
to 2 per GPU, and the training took approximately 4 days. We employ the Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 10−5 .
A.4

E VALUATION D ETAILS

Evaluation Datasets Details. We evaluate each method on three datasets: PartObj-Tiny Yang
et al. (2024), PartObj-Tiny-WT, and PartNetE Liu et al. (2023). PartObj-Tiny is a subset of Objarvse Deitke et al. (2022), containing 200 data samples across 8 categories, with manually annotated part segmentation information. PartObj-Tiny-WT is the watertight version of PartObj-Tiny.
To evaluate the performance of various networks on watertight data, we converted the meshes from
PartObj-Tiny to watertight versions and successfully obtained 189 watertight meshes. We then acquired the ground truth segmentation labels following the method described in Section A.3.1. And
there is no color on the watertight mesh, which could pose a challenge for methods based on rendering multi-view images. PartNetE, derived from PartNet-Mobility, contains 1,906 shapes covering
45 object categories in the form of point clouds. We also evaluate various networks on it to verify
their generalization performance on point cloud.
16

Tencent Hunyuan

Baseline Methods Details. We compare our P3 -SAM with recent related works including
SAMesh Tang et al. (2024), Find3D Ma et al. (2024), SAMPart3D Yang et al. (2024), ParField Liu
et al. (2025) and Point-SAM Zhou et al. (2024). Among these, SAMesh is a method based on 2D lifting that enables fully automatic segmentation. The other methods based on 2D data engines require
human intervention in the overall segmentation process: Find3D requires text prompts, SAMPart3D
and ParField need part categories for clustering, and Point-SAM necessitates manual selection of
prompt points. Since Point-SAM cannot segment the entire model, we only compare its performance on interactive segmentation.
More Results Analysis. Table 2 shows the evaluation results of various methods on PartObj-Tiny
across three tasks. Although PartField Liu et al. (2025) performs well in the second task, once connectivity information is removed, its performance drops significantly, indicating that the PartField
method is not robust to meshes without connected components. This is further evidenced by the
comparison on watertight data, where the absence of connectivity also affects its performance. In
contrast, our method consistently achieves the best performance regardless of whether connectivity information is present or not. This indicates that our approach effectively learns the geometric
features of objects, enabling accurate part segmentation. In interactive segmentation, our method
also performs the best, thanks to our unique prompt point segmentation head and IOU prediction
module. These components enable precise multi-scale segmentation predictions and automatically
select the optimal results.
The comparisons on PartObj-Tiny-WT and PartNetE are shown in Table 3. Since watertight data
and point clouds lack connectivity information, PartField’s performance is not as good as on nonwatertight data. This again validates that our method effectively learns the geometric features of
objects. Here, SAMesh will get stuck when processing watertight meshes due to the high number
of faces. Another observation is that the metrics for interactive segmentation are lower than those
for full segmentation. This is because, in the evaluation of interactive segmentation, the method
can only rely on a single prompt point, focusing more on the accuracy of individual mask segmentation. This further validates the precision of our approach. Comparisons across various datasets
and tasks, involving different data forms such as non-watertight meshes, watertight meshes, and
point clouds, demonstrate the remarkable effectiveness, robustness and generalization ability of our
methods, confirming its superior performance under diverse conditions.
We also conduct a qualitative comparison of our method and previous methods on PartObj-Tiny for
full segmentation with connectivity, as shown in Figure 4. SAMesh tends to over-segment objects,
while other methods struggle with handling complex objects, resulting in inaccurate masks, failure
to separate multiple part masks, and other segmentation errors. However, our method can accurately
segment complex objects, even performing part segmentation on the lizard and beetle in the scene of
the last row. The lower left corner of Figure 4 shows a comparison between our method and PartField
on the PartObj-Tiny-WT dataset for full segmentation without connectivity. PartField struggles to
segment watertight meshes, while our method can maintain the segmentation quality. The lower
right corner of Figure 4 also illustrates the interactive segmentation results of our method and PointSAM given the green point prompts, where our segmentation results exhibit accurate boundaries and
scales. The results show that our method can predict masks with a reasonable number of categories,
clear and accurate boundaries, and can handle complex models as well as different types of data and
tasks. They also demonstrate the great generalization and robustness of our approach.
More segmentation results of our method on PartObj-Tiny, PartObj-Tiny-WT and AI-generated
models are shown in Figures 12, 13 and 14.
A.5

A PPLICATIONS D ETAILS

Multi-Prompts Auto-Segmentation. In this setting, we have a strong condition where each prompt
corresponds to a specific part of the object. Therefore, instead of using the predicted IoU to evaluate
mask quality, we only need to select one mask for each part such that all masks collectively cover
the entire object as much as possible while minimizing overlap between the masks. Suppose the user
selects K point prompts indicating K parts of an object. We directly predict 3 masks for each point
prompt, resulting in 3K masks. For each prompt, we start from the smallest mask and progressively
attempt to switch to slightly larger masks until the entire object is covered, while ensuring that the
intersection between masks of different parts is minimized.
17

Tencent Hunyuan

Hierarchical Part Segmentation. After segmentation, we collect the point-wise features fp of the
points corresponding to each part and compute the average feature of these points as the feature
for each part. We then directly employ hierarchical clustering on these average features to obtain
hierarchical segmentation results.
Part Generation. We employ HoloPart Yang et al. (2025a) to validate that our more accurate segmentation masks can significantly improve its performance. HoloPart requires segmented part point
clouds as input and outputs complete components for each part. Originally, it used segmentation
results from SAMPart3D; here, we replace those results with our own.
Interactive Segmentation System. We have built a visual and interactive segmentation system
based on our P3 -SAM. As shown in Figure 11, this system supports real-time segmentation by
allowing users to select a prompt point. It also enables users to choose from three predicted masks
and visualize the corresponding features.

Figure 11: Our interactive segmentation system based on our P3 -SAM.

18

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 12: More results on PartObj-Tiny.

19

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 13: More results on PartObj-Tiny-WT.

20

Tencent Hunyuan

Figure 14: More results on AI generated models.

21

