R E3 S IM: Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via
3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

arXiv:2502.08645v3 [cs.RO] 16 Feb 2025

Xiaoshen Han 1 2 Minghuan Liu 1 Yilun Chen 2 Junqiu Yu 2 Xiaoyang Lyu 3 Yang Tian 2 Bolun Wang 2
Weinan Zhang 1 Jiangmiao Pang 2

a

Pick and drop a
bottle into basket

Place a vegetable
on the board

Clear objects
on the board

Stack blocks

Visual comparison

c

b
Mesh recovery

Simulated observations

Simulator

Real observations

d
Visual rendering
Take images/video in real

Dataset
Collect data in sim

Sim-real
consistency

Figure 1: Illustration of RE3 SIM. a) RE3 SIM allows zero-shot policy transfer on various tasks. b) The system pipeline to
generate high-quality data. c) High-fidelity rendering results. d) Consistency in success rates between real and simulated
environments.
Abstract
date the effectiveness of the real-to-sim-to-real
pipeline across various manipulation task scenarReal-world data collection for robotics is costly
ios. Notably, with only simulated data, we can
and resource-intensive, requiring skilled operaachieve zero-shot sim-to-real transfer with an avtors and expensive hardware. Simulations offer a
erage success rate exceeding 58%. To push the
scalable alternative but often fail to achieve simlimit of real-to-sim, we further generate a largeto-real generalization due to geometric and visual
scale simulation dataset, demonstrating how a
gaps. To address these challenges, we propose
robust policy can be built from simulation data
a 3D-photorealistic real-to-sim system, namely,
that generalizes across various objects. Codes and
3
R E S IM, addressing geometric and visual simdemos are available at: http://xshenhan.
3
to-real gaps. R E S IM employs advanced 3D regithub.io/Re3Sim/.
construction and neural rendering techniques to
faithfully recreate real-world scenarios, enabling
real-time rendering of simulated cross-view cameras within a physics-based simulator. By uti1. Introduction
lizing privileged information to collect expert
We have witnessed impressive generalization capabilities of
demonstrations efficiently in simulation, and train
robotic models (Brohan et al., 2023; Cheang et al., 2024;
robot policies with imitation learning, we valiKim et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; 2024b; Tian et al., 2024)
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 The
in certain tabletop or kitchen scenarios, achieved through
University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Yilun
high-quality teleoperation data. However, collecting realChen <chenyilun@pjlab.org.cn>, Jiangmiao Pang <pangjiangworld
expert data (Black et al., 2024; Brohan et al., 2022)
miao@pjlab.org.cn>.
remains a time-consuming and costly process. Despite adPreprint.
vancements in teleoperation systems (Cheng et al., 2024;
1

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Aldaco et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024), the • High-fidelity geometry and vision: Achieves superior relabor involved is still intensive, making this a key challenge
construction and rendering quality, reducing the sim-to-real
in robotics research. Recent efforts (O’Neill et al., 2023;
gap in both geometry and vision.
Khazatsky et al., 2024) have explored inter-institutional
• Rapid scene reconstruction: Enables novel scene reconcollaboration to address this issue. In contrast, simulation
struction in under three minutes of manual setup.
data offers the advantage of exponential scalability with
computational resources, making it an appealing and renew- • Efficient rendering: Provides 24 FPS rendering for 480p
able alternative for training robotic policies. Research on
images across two independent camera views.
sim-to-real transfer (Mandlekar et al., 2023; Jiang et al.,
2024; Nasiriany et al., 2024) has increasingly focused on
To validate the effectiveness of the pipeline, we design sevgenerating high-quality simulated or synthetic data to train
eral tabletop tasks demonstrating the generality and applicareal-world robotic policies. Unfortunately, simulation data
bility of the real-to-sim-to-real process, as shown in Fig. 1
often suffers from large sim-to-real gaps, necessitating the
The zero-shot sim-to-real policies achieve an average succollection of target domain data for policy fine-tuning.
cess rate of 58% with only about 10 minutes of data collection in simulation, showcasing the effectiveness of our
Among these gaps, two notable ones are the geometric gap
approach. We expect these experiments to highlight the
and the visual gap. The geometric gap arises from shape
potential of the real-to-sim-to-real pipeline in reducing simmismatches between objects, often due to the reliance on
to-real gaps, paving the way for future advancements in
a limited set of pre-defined CAD models in simulation,
scalable, efficient, and generalizable robotic policy.
which assume perfect structures. The visual gap, on the
other hand, comes with noiseless and imperfect rendering,
posing challenges for tasks that rely heavily on appearance
information, such as picking fresh fruits, pressing colorful
buttons, sorting products based on packaging, and so on.

2. Background
2.1. 3D Reconstruction
The goal of 3D reconstruction is to recover the geometry
of 3D scenes from various signals, such as images, point
clouds, and more. To this end, the first common step is
taking structure-from-motion approaches (e.g., Colmap) to
estimate camera poses and sparse point clouds (Schönberger
& Frahm, 2016). Once the camera poses are determined,
dense point clouds can be obtained through multi-view
stereo (MVS) techniques. These include traditional methods (Schönberger et al., 2016), as well as network-based
approaches (Yao et al., 2018). This process effectively enables the reconstruction of geometry from images. Besides,
commercial software solutions, such as ARCode and PolyCam, leverage RGB-D SLAM methods to simultaneously
estimate camera poses and depth information, facilitating
the recovery of 3D models. These software solutions often
include some post-processing techniques, such as smoothing
and inpainting, together with user-friendly GUIs, enhancing
the usability and quality of the reconstructed 3D models.

To bridge these gaps between real and simulated environments, we propose a 3D-photorealistic real-to-sim-to-real
system, R E3 S IM, namely, reconstruction-rendering-based
real-to-sim. R E3 S IM faithfully replicates real-world scenarios by combining realistic 3D geometry reconstruction and
visual RGB rendering. The 3D geometry is reconstructed
using multi-view stereo (MVS) techniques (Schönberger &
Frahm, 2016; Cernea, 2020), while the visual rendering is
achieved through Gaussian rasterization (Kerbl et al., 2023).
This dual approach enables efficient and high-fidelity reconstruction, with simulated dynamics computed through
physics engine backends (Makoviychuk et al., 2021; Xiang
et al., 2020; Todorov et al., 2012) and real-time rendering
handled by a dedicated hybrid rendering engine.
Specifically, R E3 S IM adopts a sequential real-to-sim
pipeline comprising three key steps: (a) mesh recovery for
reconstructing scene and object geometry; (b) hybrid visual
rendering for compositing foreground and background elements, and (c) real-world alignment to synchronize world
coordinates between the real and simulated environments.
Human involvement is minimal in the real-to-sim process
and limited to: (a) Placing ArUco markers in the target
scenario for real-world alignment. (b) Capturing photos
or videos of the scene and objects, including an additional
capture step to align the robot base.

2.2. Rendering
Rendering involves generating photorealistic images from
specified camera views based on either explicit or implicit
3D representations. Implicit methods, like Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021), represent the
3D space using a density field encoded in a neural network and render images through volumetric rendering techniques. Explicit representations, such as meshes and point
clouds, use texture mapping (Blinn & Newell, 1976) for
rendering and synthesizing novel views. Another recent
progress in explicit representation is Gaussian primitives,

Once all assets and robots are imported into the simulator,
R E3 S IM utilizes a privileged policy to generate high-fidelity
expert data. It incorporates the following key features to
enhance sim-to-real transfer:
2

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

3.1. System Overview

which adopt Gaussian rasterization for high-fidelity rendering, also known as 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl
et al., 2023). Compared with other methods, 3DGS achieves
more realistic rendering results and offers higher rendering
efficiency. In detail, each Gaussian primitive is modeled
as an ellipse with a full 3D covariance matrix Σ defined in
world space, centered at point µ:
1

T

−1

G(x) = e− 2 x Σ

x

R E3 S IM is a real-to-sim-real pipeline that reconstructs
meshes for collision estimation, utilizes 3D Gaussian scene
representations for rendering, and generates simulation data
within a physics-based simulator1 . It is worth noting that we
only consider reconstructing the background and foreground
objects, robots are not involved in our system since their
accurate 3D assets are usually easily accessible. Further,
we take this work as an initial study of R E3 S IM, validated
on a table-top robot arm for rigid body tasks. As shown in
Fig. 2, R E3 S IM are composed of four components: mesh
recovery for object collision computation, hybrid visual
rendering combining 3DGS for the background and meshbased rendering for the foreground, real-world alignment of
the reconstructed scene and robot positions, and large-scale
data generation for manipulation tasks.

,

where the covariance matrix Σ of a Gaussian primitive is
derived from its rotation R and scaling factor S as:
Σ = RSS T RT .
Additionally, each Gaussian is assigned a color ci and depthordered using the Z-buffer. Using the alpha-blending formula, the rendered color C for a view is calculated as:
C=

N Y
X

3.2. Mesh Recovery

αj (1 − αi )ci .

i=1 j<i

This step reconstructs realistic objects and background geometries for accurate collision detection and simulation.

3. R E3 S IM

Mesh reconstruction. The meshes of backgrounds and
objects are reconstructed separately for flexibility and are
represented in USD for extensibility. For the background,
we first employ SfM techniques (COLMAP) to estimate the
pose for each image and get the sparse point cloud based on
a set of images, and then utilize OpenMVS (Cernea, 2020)
for detailed mesh reconstruction. PolyCam (Polycam, 2020)
is also able to reconstrct the mesh of the background, but empirically, the geometric reconstruction results of OpenMVS
exhibit fewer minor protrusions and depressions compared
to those of PolyCam. Subsequently, we simplify this initial
mesh to create collision bodies. This approach effectively
captures intricate details while maintaining accurate planar
reconstruction. For foreground objects, we employ ARCode (Code, 2022), which can automatically segment the
object, balancing usability and quality.

Physic-based robot simulators, such as Isaac Sim (NVIDIA,
2021a) (PhysX (NVIDIA, 2021b)), PyBullet (Bullet) (Coumans & Bai, 2016–2021), Mujoco (Todorov et al.,
2012), and Gazebo (Koenig & Howard, 2004) (Bullet,
ODE (Smith., 2001), DART (Lee et al., 2018), and Simbody (Sherman et al., 2011)), offer high-accurate simulation
results based on underlying physics engines. However, it’s
hard to directly obtain an accurate 3D model of the realworld scene, and the simulators are not good at rendering
high-fidelity images, leaving a large gap from real-world
images. Recent advancements in 3D reconstruction (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Kerbl et al., 2023; Cernea, 2020; Yu et al.,
2024; Guédon & Lepetit, 2024) provide high-quality rendering results and detailed 3D geometric models, promising to bridge these gaps. We introduce R E3 S IM, a 3D
reconstruction-based system, to bridge the visual gap and
recover their realistic 3D meshes for sim-to-real transfer.

Post-processing. Reconstructed collision bodies often have
voids or sharp edges due to imperfect image quality, causing
erratic behavior in simulation. For example, objects may fail
to rest stably on surfaces. Void filling and surface smoothing
help improve stability and realism in simulation. As acquiring physical parameters like mass and friction is challenging
with only initial static visual data, we use default values to
simplify the process without sacrificing performance and
find it works well for many manipulation tasks.

A straightforward approach is to reconstruct objects and the
background together. However, using Multi-View Stereo
(MVS) methods for background reconstruction often leads
to suboptimal visual quality, while techniques like SuGaR
(Guédon & Lepetit, 2024) struggle with accurately reconstructing flat planes, causing protrusions and indentations
that reduce realism in object movement. Additionally,
segmenting foreground objects for manipulation is laborintensive. To address these issues, we propose separately
reconstructing background meshes for collision estimation
and leveraging 3DGS to improve rendering realism, aligning
the two. Since object rendering constitutes a small portion
of the robot’s visual observations, we opt not to use 3DGS
to render objects.

1
Isaac Sim (NVIDIA, 2021a) is used by default, but other ray
tracing options are also feasible.

3

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation
Input

Zero- shot Sim2Real
Imitation
Learning

Foreground

1

Real-World
Deployment

Background

Mesh recovery

3

Cam 2

Cam
3

4

Data Generation

m
Ca
4

Cam

1

Real-World Alignment

Rollout

Smoothness and Simplification
2

Hybrid Visual Rendering

Dataset

Align by ArUco marker

Simulator

Rule-based
Policy
Reject
Sampling

Textured meshes

3DGS-rendering

Refine by ICP

Dataset

Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed real-to-sim-to-real system, R E3 S IM. It leverages 3D reconstruction and a physicsbased simulator, providing small 3D gaps that enable large-scale simulation data generation for learning manipulation skills
via sim-to-real transfer.
3.3. Hybrid Visual Rendering

between the partial point cloud obtained from the depth
camera and the complete point cloud sampled from the
reconstructed mesh.

Color images, as a key type of perception signal, often yield
a large visual gap between simulation and the real world.
To close such a gap, we render the foreground objects and
backgrounds with hybrid real-to-sim rendering techniques.
For the foreground objects, object renderings are applied
from the mesh with ray tracing supports. Background reconstruction contains most parts of the scenes and applies
more photorealistic rendering using 3DGS. Z-buffer rendering is applied to mix objects according to ground-truth
depth. Notably, hybrid visual rendering supports multi-view
rendering according to the perspective views. The rendering
time consumption of each component is shown in Tab. 5.

3.5. Expert Data Collection
To verify the effectiveness of the real-to-sim-to-real system,
following the designed task scenarios such as pick-andplace, we collect large-scale demonstrations using the script
policy. During each rollout, we introduced domain randomizations including source/target object randomization,
and robot arm’s base position randomization. Define an expert policy πpriv (at |opriv,t ) based on privileged information
opriv,t , such as the exact pose of target objects. We can then
make use of πpriv to interact with the simulator and generate
observation-action pairs (ot , at ). Here, ot represents observations that are accessible from the real world, including
images and proprioception data. Specifically, we compute
the 6D pose of the gripper at some key steps and use the motion planner based on the RRTConnect (Kuffner & LaValle,
2000) algorithm to plan the path between the key steps in
the joint space. During data generation, reject sampling is
applied to filter out failed rollouts, improving the dataset
quality and ensuring reliability. We can continue to generate
such data with the amount according to our needs, obtaining
the simulated datasets D.

3.4. Real-World Alignment
Despite the prior alignments between rendering and meshes,
another key step is to align with real-world scenarios, specifically, the positions of the background/foreground relative
to the robots. For foreground objects, we define a range of
possible placements in the simulation. Regarding the background, we leverage the ArUco marker on the table to align
the 3DGS coordinates with the marker coordinates. Then
the ICP (Schenker, 1992; Censi, 2008; Low, 2004) postprocessing is applied to optimize the coordinate alignment
gap. Specifically, ICP optimizes the relative transformation
4

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

4. Experiment

to real-world images further demonstrates the accuracy of
our alignment. Furthermore, Tab. 1 shows the PSNR (peak
signal-to-noise ratio) and SSIM (structural similarity index
measure) evaluating the quantitative vision gap. We compare R E3 S IM with the reconstruction methods OpenMVS
and PolyCam (the method used in Torne et al. (2024)).
Both methods reconstruct textured meshes, which can be
rendered to generate visual observations. The objects are
manually aligned with those in the simulation, and some
pixel-level discrepancies remain. The background alignment also has some pixel-level deviations. These factors
collectively lead to the relatively low PSNR and SSIM values, especially in the texture-rich scene. 3DGS outperforms
Polycam in both RSNR and SSIM. Its PSNR is comparable
to OpenMVS, but SSIM is notably higher. Qualitative visual
comparisons and more analysis are shown in Appendix B.
OpenMVS’s reconstruction has cracks, causing an obvious
sim-to-real gap. These results demonstrate the advantage of
the design choice of the rendering component in R E3 S IM,
which benefits small vision gaps.

We mainly investigate the following four research questions
based on the proposed R E3 S IM system:
Q1 Does R E3 S IM produce high-quality and well-aligned
reconstruction results?
Q2 Can R E3 S IM generate high-fidelity simulation data
with small 3D sim-to-real gaps to benefit real-world
manipulation problems?
Q3 How does large-scale simulation data help in more
challenging real-world tasks?
Q4 Can R E3 S IM build the whole scene in simulation in a
time-effective way and synthesize data with low cost?
4.1. Experimental Setups
Hardware platform. In this paper, we evaluate R E3 S IM
with a Franka Research 3 robot equipped with a parallel
gripper. Two Realsense D435i depth cameras capture visual
observations—one mounted on the end-effector and another
positioned beside the robot for a third-person view.

4.3. Zero-Shot Sim-to-Real
Q2 is the main question that motivates us to build R E3 S IM,
thus we design three table-top manipulation tasks to investigate the usage of R E3 S IM:

Policy model and training details. During our sim-toreal experiments, we adopt an ACT-structured policy (Zhao
et al., 2023) with DINOV2 (Oquab et al., 2023). The images
in the dataset are compressed using JPEG format. During
training, we apply visual augmentations and for evaluation,
we use the temporal ensemble (Zhao et al., 2023) technique.
Appendix B provides further details.

1.
Pick and drop a bottle into the
basket.
The robot must pick an orange bottle
that is randomly placed within a 25cm × 35cm area on a
table and place it into a basket.
2. Place a vegetable on the board.
A
cucumber model is placed on the table in an area of
35cm × 50cm, and the cutting board’s position is varied
within a 35cm × 80cm area. The robot must grasp the
vegetable and accurately place it on the cutting board.
3. Stack blocks. The robot is tasked with stacking
three black cubes on the table. Each cube is placed
randomly within a 30cm × 10cm area separately, and the
robot must grasp and stack them successfully.

4.2. Rendering in Robot Task
Table 1: Background rendering methods comparison.
Quantitative results of the reconstruction result in terms of
PSNR and SSIM. Results are computed from 1029 robot
arm positions in the wrist view.
Background Rendering

PSNR

SSIM

Polycam
OpenMVS
3DGS

11.52 ±1.40
13.40±0.96
13.29 ±1.11

0.34 ±0.04
0.27 ±0.03
0.37 ±0.04

We rebuild these tasks in simulation via R E3 S IM, collect
100 trajectories, and train independent policies. More details
of the implementation of the rule-based policy and the evaluation methods in simulators are in Sub. A. We evaluate the
policy performances in terms of success rate evaluated in the
real world, comparing the one trained on simulation data collected by R E3 S IM, by a real-to-sim baseline method called
RialTo (Torne et al., 2024) and the policy trained on 50
real-world trajectories. Using double simulation data leads
to similar performance compared with using real data, probably both because of the small simulation-to-real gap and
because the different data collection methods for simulation
and real-world data lead to varying data quality, as detailed
in Appendix C. We also realized a state-of-the-art grasping

High-quality visual results not only require high-quality
reconstruction but also precise alignment. To address Q1,
we evaluate the quality and alignment of reconstruction results by selecting a trajectory from the simulation dataset
of tasks in Sec. 4.3. This trajectory is then replayed in the
real world to obtain ground truth (GT) images captured by
calibrated cameras. We compare the visual similarity from
both the wrist view and a third-person perspective, showcasing qualitative rendering results in Fig. 3. More rendering
results in the simulation are in Sub. E. The high similarity
5

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

sim

real

wrist view

sim

real

third view

Figure 3: Visual comparison between real and simulation. Rendering results from our hybrid rendering method compared
with photos captured by real-world cameras, highlighting the high fidelity and realism achieved by our approach.
Table 2: Quantitative results of real-to-sim-to-real evaluation for real-world manipulation tasks. Each task is tested 20
times without allowing retries in the event of failure. The policies are trained separately with 100 episodes of simulation
data (RialTo+IL and R E3 S IM +IL) and 50 episodes of real data (Real+IL). AnyGrasp combined with script primitives
(AnyGrasp+Prim) is also tested for comparison in the picking-only scenario. R E3 S IM reduces the sim-to-real gap, enabling
successful real-world deployment, achieving the best zero-shot sim-to-real performance for an average success rate of 58%.
Real-World Task
Pick and drop a bottle to basket
Stack cubes
Place a vegetable on board

RialTo+IL

AnyGrasp+Prim.

Real+IL

R E3 S IM +IL

0.4
0
0.45

0.9
-

0.8
0.15
0.6

0.75
0.25
0.75

method, AnyGrasp (Fang et al., 2023), combined with script
primitives on the pick and drop a bottle into
the basket task for comparison. This method only predicts the grasp pose instead of the whole grasping trajectory
and thus cannot be applied to other tasks.

policy to sequentially pick both seen and unseen objects one
by one. To provide a sufficient evaluation, we design four
different setups:
Seen: four seen objects (the bottle, cucumber, corn, and
eggplant) included in the data for training.
Unseen: four objects (the green pepper, banana, red bowl,
and momordica charantia) that are unseen during training.
Cluttered: all eight objects from seen and unseen.
Darkness: the testing brightness is significantly lower than
that of the simulation data. The model is evaluated on four
seen objects.
The results are presented in Fig. 4. Each setup was tested
10 times, with two additional automatic grasp attempts per
object in case of failure.

The numerical results listed in Tab. 2 demonstrate that the
data generated by R E3 S IM help the policy achieve zeroshot sim-to-real transfer, showing strong performance even
compared with the existing real-to-sim and state-of-the-art
grasping method. Furthermore, policies trained on our extensive synthetic dataset can achieve comparable or even
slightly better performance than those only trained on realworld data, indicating the effectiveness and huge potential
of high-fidelity simulation data.

Result analysis. Though trained on only five items, the
policy generalizes well to grasping new objects of similar
size despite differences in shape and color. We hypothesize
that the robot leverages the fixed scene and identifies objects
based on color differences in the background. Additionally,
objects with varying shapes often have similar grasping
positions, enabling the robot to execute successful grasps.
A larger dataset with multiple objects allows the policy to

4.4. Large-Scale Sim-to-Real
To push the limit of utilizing synthetic data for real-world
manipulation problems by answering Q3, we choose a
clear objects on the table task: the robot has
to clean up the table by picking all items that are randomly
placed on the table in a 40cm × 50cm area, and put them
into the basket. This is a long-horizon task that requires the
6

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Success Rate

1.0

1.00 1.00

0.8

Table 3: Human effort in reconstruction. The table
presents estimated reconstruction times at the table level.
Additionally, we show the human effort for reconstructing
an object with ARCode.

Real pick rate
Real success rate
0.65

0.69

0.65

0.6
0.40

0.4

0.40

0.40

0.2
0.0

seen

unseen

dark

Input Types

Video

Images

ARCode

Human Efforts (s)

51.5

84.5

60.5

cluttered

Real-world conditions

into a basket task.
Figure 4: Real-world evaluation and robustness test
for large-scale sim-to-real. The success rate reflects the
proportion of trials in which all objects were successfully
grasped, while the grasp rate indicates the proportion of
objects grasped relative to the total number on the table. See
qualitative results in the website.
1.0

0.90
0.78
0.72

Success rate

0.8

0.90
0.80
0.70

0.72
0.60

0.6

As illustrated in Fig. 1 (d), the Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.924, indicating the clear correlation between
performance in simulation and the real world. Specifically,
models that achieve higher success rates in simulation tend
to exhibit similar success rates in real-world testing. When
the success rate in simulation is low, it is often difficult for
the model to perform well in real-world scenarios. This
could be due to alignment errors, leading to a small simto-real gap, or the fact that the number of real-world test
instances is much lower than in simulation, potentially introducing bias. This consistency suggests that policies trained
with R E3 S IM are well-suited for real-world deployment,
reflecting a minimal sim-to-real gap.

0.45
0.4

0.30
Sim success rate
Real success rate
Real pick rate

0.2
0.00.00
0

2000

4000

Data size

6000

8000

4.6. Pipeline Efficiency

10000

To validate Q4, we record and compute the time of R E3 S IM
to reconstruct both the background and objects, along with
the time of generating demonstrations.

Figure 5: Data scaling effects, tested on seen objects in the
real world.

Human effort during reconstruction. In R E3 S IM, background reconstruction requires only a set of images or a
short video of the background, along with an additional image for alignment, which contains depth information. Given
the substantial human involvement in this process, we provide estimates for the time required for both foreground
and background reconstruction. Tab. 3 summarizes the time
required for different input types: video and images. Using
video as input may result in slight quality degradation due
to motion blur while using images provides better results
but requires slightly more time. Additionally, we present
the time required to reconstruct an object using ARCode.
The total reconstruction time for the scene is the sum of the
background and object reconstruction times.

maintain a relatively higher success rate, while a smaller
dataset limits the policy’s ability to exhibit this capability.
Furthermore, the policy demonstrates strong robustness to
changes in lighting conditions.
We further explored how the success rate in simulation and
real-world settings changes with varying amounts of data.
As shown in Fig. 5, increasing the size of the synthetic
dataset generated by R E3 S IM leads to a significant improvement in imitation learning performance. When the amount
of simulation data is limited, the real-world performance is
almost negligible. Doubling the data size often results in a
significant improvement in success rate until convergence
at a high performance.

Data collection cost. Tab. 4 shows the time required to
collect 100 simulation episodes for each task in Sec. 4.3,
using 8 RTX 4090 GPUs. The time required for data collection is much lower than the time needed for teleoperation in
real-world scenarios—especially considering R E3 S IM only
involves machine runtime, and the latter mostly requires
the time of data collection experts. This demonstrates our
capability to efficiently generate large-scale simulation data
at minimal cost.

4.5. Sim-Real Consistency
We evaluated the consistency of policy performance between simulated and real-world environments using policy
ACT. In this experiment, we evaluate policies trained at
different stages (from 0 to 120000 training steps) and with
3 different seeds on the pick and drop a bottle
7

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Table 4: Time cost for simulation data collection. Time
needed to collect 100 episodes of simulation data for each
task, using a machine equipped with 8 RTX 4090 GPUs.
Each GPU can run two Isaac Sim processes.
Tasks

for fast rendering and explicit representation in robotics
tasks. Additionally, methods like URDFormer (Chen et al.,
2024), Digital Cousins (Dai et al., 2024), and Articulate
Anything (Le et al., 2024) use a single image to reconstruct the environment directly, allowing for collecting large
amounts of data for imitation learning or reinforcement
learning. These approaches enhance data by varying articulations and leveraging various articulations from simulation
datasets to train models deployable in the real world.

Time Cost (minutes)

Pick and drop a bottle to basket
Place a vegetable on the board
Stack blocks

12.35
13.78
6.45

With the help of 3DGS works like RoboStudio (Lou et al.,
2024), SplatSim (Qureshi et al., 2024) and RoboGSim (Li
et al., 2024a) use multi-view images or video for world
reconstruction, improving multi-view rendering quality with
minimal cost. These methods are especially effective in
manipulation tasks involving multiple objects or occlusions.
1) RoboStudio focuses on reconstructing the URDF of a
robot, offering a photorealistic rendering result and accurate
collision mesh. 2) SplatSim utilizes pre-obtained 3D models
of objects and backgrounds to collect trajectories in the
physics simulator and then re-render them with 3DGS to
reduce the visual gap between simulated and real-world
environments, but acquiring the 3D models is hard for many
tasks. 3) RoboGSim compares rendering quality, validates
high-quality rendering results for novel pose synthesis, and
shows the potential for evaluating various manipulation
algorithms. However, its sim-to-real validation remains
limited. Different from them, R E3 S IM reconstructs both
geometric and visual aspects with small gaps, and validates
robot policies trained on simulated data through extensive
experiments in the real world.

Table 5: Average time consumption per step. Breakdown
of time consumed by each process.
Process
Physics Simulating
Gaussian Splatting Rendering
Motion Planning
Others
Total Time

Time (ms)
26.64
12.93
0.36
1.53
41.46

Time consumption breakdown. We measured the average
time spent on each phase during the data collection of the
pick and drop a bottle task in the simulator over 60 steps, as
shown in Tab. 5. The reconstructed mesh, with numerous
vertices and faces, demands more time for physics simulation. Rendering 480p images from two camera views using
3DGS adds 12.93 milliseconds, representing one-third of
the total time per step. R E3 S IM operates at approximately
24 frames per second (FPS) with two cameras, ensuring
real-time performance and visual fidelity.

6. Conclusion
5. Related Work

We introduced R E3 S IM, a novel Real-to-Sim-to-Real
pipeline that integrates Gaussian splatting with NVIDIA
Isaac Sim’s PhysX engine, improving scene reconstruction
and sim-to-real transfer for robotic manipulation tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate its efficacy and scalability,
showing that R E3 S IM significantly reduces the sim-to-real
gap and enables reliable real-world task performance. Models trained on large simulated datasets achieved competitive
success rates compared with those trained on real-world
data, highlighting the potential R E3 S IM to generate diverse,
high-quality data for pre-training large-scale robot models.

Sim-to-real. Sim-to-real transfer requires techniques to enable policies to successfully adapt from simulation to the
real world. The most direct approach is improving simulators (Todorov et al., 2012; Makoviychuk et al., 2021;
Mittal et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2020), which reduces the
sim-to-real gap. Other methods, such as domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017; Mehta et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021;
Tremblay et al., 2018; Loquercio et al., 2019; Tobin et al.,
2018) and system identification (Ramaswamy & Tangirala,
2024; Allevato et al., 2020b; Song et al., 2024; Allevato
et al., 2020a), also aim to bridge this gap.

Limitations. R E3 S IM is currently limited to rigid objects
and has not yet been extended to reconstruct articulated,
deformable objects, or liquids. Additionally, it relies on
manually defined physics parameters rather than system
identification methods. Rule-based policies for data collection become challenging as task complexity increases. We
leave addressing these limitations to future work.

Real-to-sim-to-real. Many recent works leverage realworld data to enhance simulation models. Reconstruction
methods integrated with grasping techniques, such as EvoNeRF (Kerr et al., 2023) and LERF-TOGO (Rashid et al.,
2023), enable the grasping of objects using only RGB images. Meanwhile, GaussianGrasper (Zheng et al., 2024),
SplatMover (Shorinwa et al., 2024), and GraspSplats (Ji
et al., 2024), use 3D Gaussian splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023)
8

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Impact Statement

Buslaev, A., Iglovikov, V. I., Khvedchenya, E., Parinov,
A., Druzhinin, M., and Kalinin, A. A. Albumentations:
Fast and flexible image augmentations. Information, 11
(2), 2020. ISSN 2078-2489. doi: 10.3390/info11020125.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/11/
2/125.

The proposed R E3 S IM system provides an intriguing way
of generating simulated robot demonstrations for real-world
tasks. This work is meant to release the human burden of
collecting large-scale real-world data, improve efficiency,
and push the limit of generalist robot policies with data
scaling law. R E3 S IM can be applied across various robot
applications and thus may cause potential unemployment
issues.

Censi, A. An icp variant using a point-to-line metric. In
2008 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pp. 19–25. Ieee, 2008.
Cernea, D. OpenMVS: Multi-view stereo reconstruction library. 2020. URL https://cdcseacave.github.
io/openMVS.

References
Aldaco, J., Armstrong, T., Baruch, R., Bingham, J., Chan, S.,
Draper, K., Dwibedi, D., Finn, C., Florence, P., Goodrich,
S., et al. Aloha 2: An enhanced low-cost hardware for
bimanual teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02292,
2024.

Cheang, C.-L., Chen, G., Jing, Y., Kong, T., Li, H., Li,
Y., Liu, Y., Wu, H., Xu, J., Yang, Y., Zhang, H., and
Zhu, M. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model
with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.06158, 2024.

Allevato, A., Short, E. S., Pryor, M., and Thomaz,
A.
Tunenet: One-shot residual tuning for system identification and sim-to-real robot task transfer. In Kaelbling, L. P., Kragic, D., and Sugiura,
K. (eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Robot
Learning, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pp. 445–455. PMLR, 30 Oct–01
Nov 2020a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v100/allevato20a.html.

Chen, X., Hu, J., Jin, C., Li, L., and Wang, L. Understanding
domain randomization for sim-to-real transfer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.03239, 2021.
Chen, Z., Walsman, A., Memmel, M., Mo, K., Fang, A.,
Vemuri, K., Wu, A., Fox, D., and Gupta, A. Urdformer: A pipeline for constructing articulated simulation
environments from real-world images. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.11656, 2024.

Allevato, A. D., Schaertl Short, E., Pryor, M., and Thomaz,
A. L. Iterative residual tuning for system identification
and sim-to-real robot learning. Autonomous Robots, 44
(7):1167–1182, 2020b.

Cheng, X., Li, J., Yang, S., Yang, G., and Wang, X. Opentelevision: Teleoperation with immersive active visual
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01512, 2024.
Code, A. Ar code. https://ar-code.com/, 2022.

Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M.,
Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter,
B., et al. π0 : A vision-language-action flow model for
general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164,
2024.

Coumans, E. and Bai, Y. Pybullet, a python module for
physics simulation for games, robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2021.
Dai, T., Wong, J., Jiang, Y., Wang, C., Gokmen, C., Zhang,
R., Wu, J., and Fei-Fei, L. Acdc: Automated creation of
digital cousins for robust policy learning. arXiv e-prints,
pp. arXiv–2410, 2024.

Blinn, J. F. and Newell, M. E. Texture and reflection in
computer generated images. Commun. ACM, 19(10):
542–547, October 1976. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.
1145/360349.360353. URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/360349.360353.

Fang, H.-S., Wang, C., Fang, H., Gou, M., Liu, J., Yan,
H., Liu, W., Xie, Y., and Lu, C. Anygrasp: Robust and
efficient grasp perception in spatial and temporal domains.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.

Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J.,
Finn, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A.,
Hsu, J., et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.

Fu, Z., Zhao, T. Z., and Finn, C. Mobile aloha: Learning
bimanual mobile manipulation with low-cost whole-body
teleoperation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
2024.

Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen,
X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A.,
Finn, C., et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models
transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.

Guédon, A. and Lepetit, V. Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian
splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruction and highquality mesh rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
9

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 5354–5363, 2024.

volume 3, pp. 2149–2154 vol.3, 2004. doi: 10.1109/
IROS.2004.1389727.

Ji, M., Qiu, R.-Z., Zou, X., and Wang, X. Graspsplats:
Efficient manipulation with 3d feature splatting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.02084, 2024.

Kuffner, J. and LaValle, S. Rrt-connect: An efficient approach to single-query path planning. In Proceedings
2000 ICRA. Millennium Conference. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. Symposia Proceedings (Cat. No.00CH37065), volume 2, pp. 995–1001
vol.2, 2000. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2000.844730.

Jiang, Z., Xie, Y., Lin, K., Xu, Z., Wan, W., Mandlekar,
A., Fan, L., and Zhu, Y. Dexmimicgen: Automated
data generation for bimanual dexterous manipulation via
imitation learning. 2024.

Le, L., Xie, J., Liang, W., Wang, H.-J., Yang, Y., Ma, Y. J.,
Vedder, K., Krishna, A., Jayaraman, D., and Eaton, E.
Articulate-anything: Automatic modeling of articulated
objects via a vision-language foundation model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.13882, 2024.

Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., and Drettakis,
G. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field
rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4),
July 2023. URL https://repo-sam.inria.fr/
fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/.

Lee, J., X. Grey, M., Ha, S., Kunz, T., Jain, S., Ye, Y.,
S. Srinivasa, S., Stilman, M., and Karen Liu, C. Dart:
Dynamic animation and robotics toolkit. The Journal of
Open Source Software, 3(22):500, 2018.

Kerr, J., Fu, L., Huang, H., Avigal, Y., Tancik, M., Ichnowski, J., Kanazawa, A., and Goldberg, K. Evo-nerf:
Evolving nerf for sequential robot grasping of transparent
objects. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 353–367.
PMLR, 2023.

Li, X., Liu, M., Zhang, H., Yu, C., Xu, J., Wu, H., Cheang,
C., Jing, Y., Zhang, W., Liu, H., et al. Vision-language
foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.01378, 2023.

Khazatsky, A., Pertsch, K., Nair, S., Balakrishna, A., Dasari,
S., Karamcheti, S., Nasiriany, S., Srirama, M. K., Chen,
L. Y., Ellis, K., Fagan, P. D., Hejna, J., Itkina, M., Lepert,
M., Ma, Y. J., Miller, P. T., Wu, J., Belkhale, S., Dass, S.,
Ha, H., Jain, A., Lee, A., Lee, Y., Memmel, M., Park, S.,
Radosavovic, I., Wang, K., Zhan, A., Black, K., Chi, C.,
Hatch, K. B., Lin, S., Lu, J., Mercat, J., Rehman, A., Sanketi, P. R., Sharma, A., Simpson, C., Vuong, Q., Walke,
H. R., Wulfe, B., Xiao, T., Yang, J. H., Yavary, A., Zhao,
T. Z., Agia, C., Baijal, R., Castro, M. G., Chen, D., Chen,
Q., Chung, T., Drake, J., Foster, E. P., Gao, J., Herrera,
D. A., Heo, M., Hsu, K., Hu, J., Jackson, D., Le, C., Li, Y.,
Lin, K., Lin, R., Ma, Z., Maddukuri, A., Mirchandani, S.,
Morton, D., Nguyen, T., O’Neill, A., Scalise, R., Seale,
D., Son, V., Tian, S., Tran, E., Wang, A. E., Wu, Y., Xie,
A., Yang, J., Yin, P., Zhang, Y., Bastani, O., Berseth, G.,
Bohg, J., Goldberg, K., Gupta, A., Gupta, A., Jayaraman,
D., Lim, J. J., Malik, J., Martı́n-Martı́n, R., Ramamoorthy, S., Sadigh, D., Song, S., Wu, J., Yip, M. C., Zhu,
Y., Kollar, T., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Droid: A largescale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12945.

Li, X., Li, J., Zhang, Z., Zhang, R., Jia, F., Wang, T.,
Fan, H., Tseng, K.-K., and Wang, R. Robogsim: A
real2sim2real robotic gaussian splatting simulator. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.11839, 2024a.
Li, X., Li, P., Liu, M., Wang, D., Liu, J., Kang, B., Ma, X.,
Kong, T., Zhang, H., and Liu, H. Towards generalist robot
policies: What matters in building vision-language-action
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14058, 2024b.
Loquercio, A., Kaufmann, E., Ranftl, R., Dosovitskiy, A.,
Koltun, V., and Scaramuzza, D. Deep drone racing: From
simulation to reality with domain randomization. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 36(1):1–14, 2019.
Lou, H., Liu, Y., Pan, Y., Geng, Y., Chen, J., Ma, W., Li, C.,
Wang, L., Feng, H., Shi, L., et al. Robo-gs: A physics
consistent spatial-temporal model for robotic arm with
hybrid representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14873,
2024.
Low, K.-L. Linear least-squares optimization for point-toplane icp surface registration. Chapel Hill, University of
North Carolina, 4(10):1–3, 2004.

Kim, M. J., Pertsch, K., Karamcheti, S., Xiao, T., Balakrishna, A., Nair, S., Rafailov, R., Foster, E., Lam, G., Sanketi, P., et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-languageaction model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.

Makoviychuk, V., Wawrzyniak, L., Guo, Y., Lu, M., Storey,
K., Macklin, M., Hoeller, D., Rudin, N., Allshire, A.,
Handa, A., and State, G. Isaac gym: High performance
gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning, 2021.

Koenig, N. and Howard, A. Design and use paradigms
for gazebo, an open-source multi-robot simulator. In
2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37566),

Mandlekar, A., Nasiriany, S., Wen, B., Akinola, I., Narang,
Y., Fan, L., Zhu, Y., and Fox, D. Mimicgen: A data
10

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot
Learning, 2023.

Rashid, A., Sharma, S., Kim, C. M., Kerr, J., Chen, L. Y.,
Kanazawa, A., and Goldberg, K. Language embedded radiance fields for zero-shot task-oriented grasping. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=k-Fg8JDQmc.

Mehta, B., Diaz, M., Golemo, F., Pal, C. J., and Paull, L.
Active domain randomization. In Conference on Robot
Learning, pp. 1162–1176. PMLR, 2020.

Schenker, P. S. Sensor fusion iv: Control paradigms and
data structures; proceedings of the meeting, boston, ma,
nov. 12-15, 1991. Number SPIE-1611. Society of PhotoOptical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE Proceedings.
Vol. 1611), 1992.

Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P. P., Tancik, M., Barron, J. T.,
Ramamoorthi, R., and Ng, R. Nerf: Representing scenes
as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
Mittal, M., Yu, C., Yu, Q., Liu, J., Rudin, N., Hoeller,
D., Yuan, J. L., Singh, R., Guo, Y., Mazhar, H., Mandlekar, A., Babich, B., State, G., Hutter, M., and Garg,
A. Orbit: A unified simulation framework for interactive robot learning environments. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 8(6):3740–3747, 2023. doi:
10.1109/LRA.2023.3270034.

Schönberger, J. L. and Frahm, J.-M. Structure-from-motion
revisited. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Nasiriany, S., Maddukuri, A., Zhang, L., Parikh, A., Lo, A.,
Joshi, A., Mandlekar, A., and Zhu, Y. Robocasa: Largescale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots.
In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2024.

Sherman, M. A., Seth, A., and Delp, S. L. Simbody: multibody dynamics for biomedical research. Procedia Iutam,
2:241–261, 2011.

NVIDIA. Nvidia isaac sim, 2021a. URL https://
developer.nvidia.com/isaac-sim.

Shorinwa, O., Tucker, J., Smith, A., Swann, A., Chen, T.,
Firoozi, R., Kennedy, M. D., and Schwager, M. Splatmover: Multi-stage, open-vocabulary robotic manipulation via editable gaussian splatting. 2024.

Schönberger, J. L., Zheng, E., Pollefeys, M., and Frahm,
J.-M. Pixelwise view selection for unstructured multiview stereo. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2016.

NVIDIA. Nvidia physx, 2021b. URL https://
nvidia-omniverse.github.io/PhysX/.

Smith., R. L. Open dynamics engine (ode). https://
ode.org, 2001.

O’Neill, A., Rehman, A., Gupta, A., Maddukuri, A.,
Gupta, A., Padalkar, A., Lee, A., Pooley, A., Gupta,
A., Mandlekar, A., et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic
learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08864, 2023.

Song, R., Gao, S., and Li, Y. Sim-to-real in unmanned
surface vehicle control: A system identification-based
approach for enhanced training environments. In 2024
9th International Conference on Electronic Technology
and Information Science (ICETIS), pp. 563–570, 2024.
doi: 10.1109/ICETIS61828.2024.10593794.

Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec,
M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., ElNouby, A., et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features
without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193,
2023.

Tian, Y., Yang, S., Zeng, J., Wang, P., Lin, D., Dong, H.,
and Pang, J. Predictive inverse dynamics models are
scalable learners for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15109, 2024.

Polycam. Polycam. https://poly.cam, 2020.

Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W.,
and Abbeel, P. Domain randomization for transferring
deep neural networks from simulation to the real world.
In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent
robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30. IEEE, 2017.

Qureshi, M. N., Garg, S., Yandun, F., Held, D., Kantor, G.,
and Silwal, A. Splatsim: Zero-shot sim2real transfer of
rgb manipulation policies using gaussian splatting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.10161, 2024.

Tobin, J., Biewald, L., Duan, R., Andrychowicz, M., Handa,
A., Kumar, V., McGrew, B., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Welinder, P., et al. Domain randomization and generative models for robotic grasping. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
3482–3489. IEEE, 2018.

Ramaswamy, J. and Tangirala, A. K. Enhancing system
identification through transfer learning in gaussian process models: Bridging sim-to-real and cross-environment
applications. In 2024 SICE Festival with Annual Conference (SICE FES), pp. 806–811, 2024.
11

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.
6386109.
Torne, M., Simeonov, A., Li, Z., Chan, A., Chen, T., Gupta,
A., and Agrawal, P. Reconciling reality through simulation: A real-to-sim-to-real approach for robust manipulation. Arxiv, 2024.
Tremblay, J., Prakash, A., Acuna, D., Brophy, M., Jampani,
V., Anil, C., To, T., Cameracci, E., Boochoon, S., and
Birchfield, S. Training deep networks with synthetic data:
Bridging the reality gap by domain randomization. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 969–977, 2018.
Xiang, F., Qin, Y., Mo, K., Xia, Y., Zhu, H., Liu, F., Liu,
M., Jiang, H., Yuan, Y., Wang, H., Yi, L., Chang, A. X.,
Guibas, L. J., and Su, H. SAPIEN: A simulated partbased interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
June 2020.
Yang, S., Liu, M., Qin, Y., Runyu, D., Jialong, L., Cheng,
X., Yang, R., Yi, S., and Wang, X. Ace: A cross-platfrom
visual-exoskeletons for low-cost dexterous teleoperation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:240, 2024.
Yao, Y., Luo, Z., Li, S., Fang, T., and Quan, L. Mvsnet:
Depth inference for unstructured multi-view stereo. European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Yu, M., Lu, T., Xu, L., Jiang, L., Xiangli, Y., and Dai,
B. Gsdf: 3dgs meets sdf for improved rendering and
reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16964, 2024.
Zhao, T. Z., Kumar, V., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost
hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
Zheng, Y., Chen, X., Zheng, Y., Gu, S., Yang, R., Jin, B., Li,
P., Zhong, C., Wang, Z., Liu, L., et al. Gaussiangrasper:
3d language gaussian splatting for open-vocabulary
robotic grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09637, 2024.

12

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

The appendix is organized as follows:
• Sec. A illustrates the detailed design of the rule-based policy and the evaluation method of the tasks in Sec. 4.3 and
Sec. 4.4.
• Sec. B illustrates the details of the policy training and image augmentation.
• Sec. C explains the differences in properties between simulated and real data, providing insights into why policies trained
on these datasets exhibit different performance characteristics.
• Sec. E presents additional rendering results of various tasks from different camera angles.

A. Task Details
This section describes the design of the rule-based policy and the evaluation method for each task.
Pick and drop a bottle into the basket. This task consists of two steps: 1) determining the 6D pose of
the gripper before picking, and 2) identifying the 6D pose of the placement position. The pre-pick pose is derived from
the object’s point cloud, while the placement position is fixed. Motion planning in joint space guides the robotic arm from
the starting position to the two key positions for picking or releasing the object. Picking success depends on the positional
relationship between the robotic arm, the gripper, and the object’s height relative to the table. Upon release, the object is
considered successfully placed if its horizontal position lies within the basket’s area.
Placing a vegetable on the board The board’s center serves as the placement position. The rule-based policy
follows a similar approach to the previous tasks. Success is achieved only if the object’s horizontal position during placement
lies within a small region near the board’s center.
Stack blocks. This task involves sequentially picking and placing two objects. Using the objects’ 3D models, the
pre-pick pose and placement position are calculated. The implementation resembles the pick and drop a bottle
into the basket task. The second block is picked only after the first is successfully placed; otherwise, the trajectory
is terminated early and discarded. Stacking is considered successful if the horizontal positions of the two objects align and
their height difference equals the height of one block.
Clear objects on the table. To minimize action variability in identical states and simplify model training, the
rule-based policy prioritizes picking objects closer to the robot base. Due to the large number of objects, randomizing
their initial positions often results in overlapping point clouds, leading to unpredictable physics simulation outcomes.
Therefore, during domain randomization, configurations with intersecting objects are filtered out before simulation. The
task is considered complete only when all objects are successfully picked and placed in their designated positions.

B. More Experiment Details
Qualtative comparison of background rendering methods. We collected a trajectory using teleoperation in the simulator
and replayed it in the real world. Visual comparisons of reconstruction results from various methods are shown in Figure
6. PolyCam tends to blur details in certain areas, OpenMVS’s reconstructed mesh texture shows cracks, while 3DGS
produces high-quality renderings. Table 1 shows that OpenMVS’s PSNR is slightly higher than 3DGS’s, likely because the
Table 6: Hyper-parameters for Data Augmentation.
Params

Value

Batch size
Epochs
Learning rate for warmup steps
Kl weight
Hidden dim
Dim feedforward

8
100
1000
10
512
3200

1

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Real

OpenMVS

PolyCam

3DGS

Figure 6: Visual comparison of rendering approaches. Rendering results of reconstruction outputs from PolyCam,
OpenMVS, and 3DGS, compared with real-world photos.
Table 7: Ablation on data augmentation methods. Success rates (SR) of the single-item picking task in both simulated
and real-world environments for different image augmentation techniques.
Augmentation

Sim SR

Real SR

+ Gaussian Blur
+ Defocus
+ ColorJitter
+ Gaussian Noise

0.77
0.45
0.97
0.37
0.94

0.25
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.8

background and crack colors are similar, making PSNR less sensitive. However, the cracks cause increased variance within
patches, leading to a lower SSIM compared to 3DGS.
Policy Training. The policy predicts a sequence of future k-step actions from single-step observations, including two-view
images and proprioception data. To better capture information from the images, we replace the original ResNet architecture
with DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) small as the model’s encoder. During training, we apply visual augmentations, including
Gaussian Blur, Defocus, Color Jittering, and Gaussian Noise, to enhance robustness. Additionally, we apply cosine decay
to the learning rate (lr) to facilitate easier convergence during model training. The hyperparameters related to model training
for tasks in Sec. 4.3 are listed in Table 6, and because we use a much larger dataset for the Clear objects on the
table task, we train the policy only for 8 epochs. During the evaluation, the temporal ensemble (Zhao et al., 2023)
technique is used to smooth the final action for rollouts.
Image augmentation. Recognizing that Gaussian splatting inherently cannot replicate certain visual effects such as motion
blur and focus-dependent blur, however, due to camera motion, photos taken during the actual deployment of the device may
appear blurred. Additionally, the brightness of the room may change over time. To simulate this phenomenon during model
training, we apply random transformations to the images using the implementation from (Buslaev et al., 2020), including
Gaussian Blur, Decocus, Color Jitter and Gaussian Noise.
As presented in Tab. 7, applying appropriate image augmentation techniques enhances model performance in both simulated
and real-world environments. Specifically, augmentations such as blur and defocus simulate the blurring caused by camera
motion. Adding noise and blur together may help the model learn key information for completing tasks, reducing sensitivity
to changes in irrelevant information and enabling more robust performance in real-world scenarios. Using these image
2

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

augmentation methods can achieve the highest success rate in real-world environments, indicating their effectiveness in
bridging the sim-to-real gap between 3D Gaussian splatting rendering results and real-world camera outputs.
Evaluation in simulation. To employ rejection sampling during data collection and evaluate the training policy, a mechanism
is required to determine whether the task has been successfully completed. The relationship between the gripper and the
object’s point cloud, as well as the distance between the object and the tabletop, can help verify if the object has been
successfully grasped. Furthermore, the relative position between the object to be grasped and the target can be used to
confirm whether the item has been placed in the correct position.

quality=10

quality=20

quality=30

quality=40

quality=50

quality=70

quality=90

quality=100

Figure 7: Compression analysis. Qualitative and quantitative analysis using third-person view images to demonstrate the
impact of different JPEG quality parameters on image quality, task success rate, and compression ratio in the place a
vegetable on the board task. The policies are trained on compressed data, but uncompressed data is used during
deployment.

Data saving format. For complex tasks, we require a large amount of simulation data to achieve satisfactory results. Storing
image data without any compression is costly in terms of space. We compress the images using the JPEG format. During
deployment, uncompressed data is used to retain more information. Fig. 7 shows the image quality at different quality
settings, the success rate of models trained on the place a vegetable on the board task, and the corresponding
compression rates. In our experiments, we chose a quality setting of 40, as it results in almost no perceptible loss in quality
while saving a significant amount of storage space.

C. Comparison over Simulated and Real Data
We train the policy with 100 episodes of simulation data and 50 episodes of real-world data, achieving comparable
performance in the real-world setting. In this section, we analyze the differences and similarities between simulated and
real data, exploring the underlying causes. Real-world and simulation data often exhibit variations in both distribution and
quality, because of differences in scene initialization methods and trajectory preferences between human operators and the
rule-based policy.
C.1. Object Location
In simulation, we define a rectangular region and use the standard library’s random implementation to achieve an almost
uniform distribution. In the real world, random initialization can only rely on operator estimation. In Fig. 8, we visualize
the initial object position distributions from simulation data (100 episodes) and real-world data (50 episodes) used for
training. The visualization reveals that despite operators consciously attempting to randomize object positions within the
corresponding area, the data distributions show slight differences. Specifically, we find that in the pick and drop a
bottle into the basket task, the real-world data shows a wider distribution, while in the other two tasks, the
simulation data has a slightly broader spread. As seen in Table2, tasks with a broader distribution tend to yield better
performance.
3

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Figure 8: Data distribution. We show the initial locations of objects in each task described in Sec. 4.3. There are 100
episodes of simulation data(Sim) and 50 episodes of real-world data(Real). We show each cube’s location in stack
blocks tasks separately.

Figure 9: Data quality. Analysis of differences between real-world and simulation data properties. The first row presents
statistical data on the distribution of gripper angles per time step across episodes. The second row displays the Kernel
Density Estimate (KDE) of episode lengths.

C.2. Data Quality
In Fig. 9, we visualize the distribution of episode lengths and gripper angles relative to the gravity direction. Due to different
data collection methods, there are significant differences in trajectory lengths. In simulation, the motion planner tends to take
the shortest path, resulting in shorter trajectories but with larger angular variations. Additionally, we empirically observe
that the motion planner simultaneously adjusts both the gripper’s rotation and position, which rarely occurs in real-world
teleoperation using a space mouse. When reconstructing the scene, we did not capture images from positions with large
angles, which led to reduced rendering realism in high-angle simulations. This could lead to the need for more simulated
data to compensate for these discrepancies. On the other hand, longer trajectories may include more pauses, which can
negatively impact model training due to reduced action continuity.

D. Co-training and Fine-tuning
We tested the effectiveness of co-training and pretrain-finetune on the Stack blocks task. Specifically, we report the
speed characteristics during model execution. As shown in Figure 10(a), the policy trained on simulation data exhibits
4

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

(a)

(b)

Figure 10: Features of co-training and fine-tuning models. (a) KDE of the Euclidean distance traveled by the robotic arm’s
end effector between adjacent time steps. (b) The number of time steps taken by the robotic arm from the start of movement
to the first closure of the gripper. ”Sim” and ”Real” indicate models trained on simulated and real data, respectively, while
”Co-train” and ”Fine-tune” refer to models trained on a mix of data and pre-trained with real data, respectively.
relatively fast speeds for many time steps, while the model trained on real data mostly demonstrates slower speeds. The
co-training model lies between these two extremes. After fine-tuning with real data, the model’s speed decreases a lot
compared to the simulation model but remains slightly faster than the real data-trained model. Since only real data was used
for fine-tuning, the final model is closer to the real data-trained model than the co-training model. Figure 10(b) illustrates
the number of time steps required for the robotic arm to move from the start to the first closure of the gripper, reflecting the
average speed of the arm’s motion. The models trained with real data or fine-tuning with real data are relatively slow, while
models trained with simulation data or jointly trained with simulation data exhibit a higher speed.
These suggest that the distribution of simulation and real data is generally similar and that the data generated by our method
can be integrated into real data through pretraining or co-training, introducing new features without causing the training
process to collapse.

E. Result Visualization
OpenMVS is also capable of providing a textured mesh for acquiring visual observations. A qualitative comparison of
the rendering quality between R E3 S IM and OpenMVS is illustrated in Figure 11. It is evident that, powered by 3DGS,
R E3 S IM achieves superior visual rendering outcomes. This rationale explains why we do not directly utilize the results from
OpenMVS for obtaining visual rendering results.
We already show the rendering results of pick and drop a bottle into the basket task in Fig. 3. Here
we present multi-view renderings of the data collection process across the other three sim-to-real tasks: place a
vegetable on the board, stack blocks, and clear objects on the table in Fig. 12, Fig. 13 and
Fig. 14 separately. These visualizations provide a detailed demonstration of our data collection procedure.

5

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

3DGS

OpenMVS

3DGS

OpenMVS

3DGS

OpenMVS

3DGS

OpenMVS

Figure 11: Visual comparison between R E3 S IM and OpenMVS.

6

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Figure 12: Rendering results of place a vegetable on the board task.

7

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Figure 13: Rendering results of stack blocks task.

8

Generating High-Fidelity Simulation Data via 3D-Photorealistic Real-to-Sim for Robotic Manipulation

Figure 14: Rendering results of clear objects on the table task.

9

