arXiv:2403.03949v3 [cs.RO] 24 Nov 2024

Reconciling Reality through Simulation: A
Real-to-Sim-to-Real Approach for Robust
Manipulation
Marcel Torne1 Anthony Simeonov1,4 Zechu Li1,3,4 April Chan1,4
Tao Chen1,4
Abhishek Gupta2∗ Pulkit Agrawal1,4∗
1 Massachusets Institute of Technology
2 University of Washington
3 TU Darmstadt
4 Improbable AI Lab

Abstract—Imitation learning methods need significant human
supervision to learn policies robust to changes in object poses,
physical disturbances, and visual distractors. Reinforcement
learning, on the other hand, can explore the environment
autonomously to learn robust behaviors but may require impractical amounts of unsafe real-world data collection. To learn
performant, robust policies without the burden of unsafe realworld data collection or extensive human supervision, we propose
RialTo, a system for robustifying real-world imitation learning
policies via reinforcement learning in “digital twin” simulation
environments constructed on the fly from small amounts of realworld data. To enable this real-to-sim-to-real pipeline, RialTo
proposes an easy-to-use interface for quickly scanning and
constructing digital twins of real-world environments. We also introduce a novel “inverse distillation” procedure for bringing realworld demonstrations into simulated environments for efficient
fine-tuning, with minimal human intervention and engineering
required. We evaluate RialTo across a variety of robotic manipulation problems in the real world, such as robustly stacking dishes
on a rack, placing books on a shelf, and six other tasks. RialTo
increases (over 67%) in policy robustness without requiring
extensive human data collection. Project website and code at
https://real-to-sim-to-real.github.io/RialTo/.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Imagine a robot that can de-clutter kitchens by putting
dishes on a dish rack. Consider all the environmental variations
that might be encountered: different configurations of plates
or changes in rack positions, a plate unexpectedly slipping in
the gripper during transit, and visual distractions, including
clutter and lighting changes. For the robot to be effective,
it must robustly solve the task across the various scene and
object perturbations, without being brittle to transient scene
disturbances. Our desiderata is a framework that makes it easy
for humans to program the robot to achieve a task robustly
under these variations or disturbances. To be a scalable choice
for deployment, the framework should not make task-specific
assumptions and must seamlessly apply to many tasks.
To design these types of robust robot controllers, one could
attempt to train policies across a massive range of scenes and
with highly variable objects [12, 21]. This is hard-pressed
to provide a scalable solution to robotic learning for two
reasons - (1) it is challenging to actually collect or synthesize
* Equal advising

data across a massive range of scenes since content creation
can be challenging in simulation and data collection can be
challenging for the real world, (2) a widely general, robust
policy may be overly conservative, lowering its performance
on the specific target domains encountered on deployment.
Alternatively, we suggest that to maximally benefit a specific
user, it is more critical that the robot achieves high success
in their particular home environment, showing robustness
to various local disturbances and distractors that might be
encountered in this setting. With this in mind, our goal is to
develop a robot learning technique that requires minimal human effort to synthesize visuomotor manipulation controllers
that are extremely robust for task performance in deployment
environments. The question becomes - how do we acquire
these robust controllers without requiring prohibitive amounts
of effort for data collection or simulation engineering?
A potential technique for data-driven learning of robotic
control policies is to adopt the paradigm of imitation learning
(IL), learning from expert demonstration data [58, 56, 25].
However, controllers learned via imitation learning tend to
exhibit limited robustness unless a large number of demonstrations are collected. Furthermore, imitation learning does
not learn to recover from mistakes or out-of-distribution disturbances unless such behaviors were intentionally demonstrated.
This makes direct imitation learning algorithms unsuitable for
widespread, robust deployment in real-world scenarios.
The alternative paradigm of reinforcement learning (RL)
allows robots to train on self-collected data, reducing the
burden on humans for extensive data collection [31] and
to discover robust recovery behaviors beyond a set of precollected demonstrations (e.g., re-grasping when an object is
dropped, re-aligning when an object moves in the gripper,
adjusting to external perturbations, etc. — see examples in
Fig. 1). However, directly performing RL in the real world is
prohibitively slow, often results in unsafe data collection, and
is challenging due to problems like resets and reward specification [75]. Therefore, currently, it’s impractical in many cases
to employ RL for learning robust control policies directly in
the real world. Simulation, on the other hand, offers the ability
to collect significant amounts of data broadly, cheaply, safely,
and with privileged information [12, 34, 61, 40, 1]. However,

1

Real-to-sim transfer of the scene

2

Real-to-sim transfer of policies

Point cloud-based
Policy

3D
reconstruction
through API
Articulated USD
(Universal Scene Descriptor)

3

Imitation
learning

Simulation ﬁne-tuning

RL fine-tuning with sparse
rewards and demos

Simulation rollout

Privileged information
demos in sim
Sim-to-real transfer

New distractor
objects

Robust to disturbances and distractors in the real world

Robot base
moved

Perturb closing
toaster

4

Policy succeeds
opening the toaster

Fig. 1. RialTo system overview. 1) Transfer the real-world scene to the simulator through an easy-to-use API (see Section III-B). 2) Transfer a policy
learned from real-world demonstrations to collect a set of demonstrations with privileged information in simulation. We note this step is optional, and RialTo
is compatible with skipping this step and providing demonstrations in simulation (see Section IV-C2) 3) Use the collected set of demonstrations to bias
exploration in the RL fine-tuning with sparse rewards of a state-based policy (see Section III-C) 4) Perform teacher-student distillation and deploy the policy
in the real world obtaining robust behaviors (see Section III-D).

manually constructing geometrically, visually, and physically
realistic simulation environments for problems like robotic
manipulation in the home can be time and labor-intensive,
making it an impractical alternative at scale.
To safely and efficiently learn robust manipulation behaviors, our key insight is to train RL controllers on quickly
constructed simulation scenes. By leveraging a video from
the target deployment domain, we can obtain scenes complete
with accurate geometry and articulation that reflect the appearance and kinematics of the real world. These “in-domain”
simulation environments can serve as a sandbox to safely
and quickly learn robust policies across various disturbances
and distractors, without requiring expensive exploration in
the real world. We show how imitation learning policies
trained with small numbers of real-world demonstrations can
be robustified via large-scale RL fine-tuning in simulation
on these constructed simulation environments, using minimal
amounts of human effort in terms of environment design
and reward engineering. To remove the burden of reward

engineering, we leverage a set of real-world demonstrations
that bootstrap efficient fine-tuning with reinforcement learning.
These real-world demonstrations help narrow the sim-to-real
gap and increase the performance of our policies, as shown in
Section IV-B. However, transferring real-world demonstrations
into simulation is non-trivial because we do not have access
to the Lagrangian state of the environment (e.g. object poses).
We therefore propose a new “inverse-distillation” technique
that enables transferring real-world demos into the simulation.
After using RL in constructed simulation environments to
robustify the real-world imitation learning policies, the finetuned policies can be transferred back to the real world with
significantly improved success rates and robustness to test-time
disturbances.
Overall, our pipeline simultaneously improves the effectiveness of both reinforcement and imitation learning. RL in
simulation helps make imitation learning policies deploymentready without requiring prohibitive amounts of unsafe, interactive data collection in the real world. At the same time,

bootstrapping from real-world demonstration data via inverse
distillation makes the exploration problem tractable for RL
fine-tuning in simulation. This minimizes the amount of taskspecific engineering required by algorithm designers such as
designing the dense rewards or manually designing the scenes.
Concretely, we propose RialTo, a system for robustifying
real-world imitation learning policies without requiring significant human effort, by constructing realistic simulation analogs
for real-world environments on the fly and using these for
robust policy learning. Our contributions include:
• A simple policy learning pipeline that synthesizes controllers to perform diverse manipulation tasks in the
real world that (i) reduces human effort in constructing
environments and specifying rewards, (ii) produces robust policies that transfer to real-world, cluttered scenes,
showing robustness to disturbances and distractors, (iii)
requires minimal amounts of expensive and unsafe data
collection in the real world.
• A novel algorithm for transferring demonstrations from
the real world to the reconstructed simulation to bootstrap efficient reinforcement learning from the low-level
Lagrangian state for policy fine-tuning. We show that
this real-to-sim transfer of human demonstrations both
improves efficiency and biases policies toward realistic
behavior in simulation which effectively transfers back
to the real world.
• An intuitive graphical interface for quickly scanning
and constructing digital twins of real-world scenes with
articulation, separated objects, and accurate geometries.
• We present extensive experimental evaluation showing
that RialTo produces reactive policies that solve several
manipulation tasks in real-world scenes under physical
disturbances and visual distractions. Across eight diverse
tasks, our pipeline provides an improvement of 67%
over baselines in average success rate across scenarios
with varying object poses, visual distractors, and physical
perturbations.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Learning Visuomotor Control from Demonstrations:
Behavior cloning (BC) of expert trajectories can effectively
acquire robot control policies that operate in the real world [19,
13, 72, 6, 20, 39]. While several works have used BC
to learn performant policies from small to moderately-sized
datasets [13, 72, 39], performance tends to drop when the
policy must generalize to variations in scene layouts and
appearance. Techniques for improving BC often require much
larger-scale data collection [6, 57], raising scalability concerns.
Other techniques support generalization with intermediate
representations [20] and leverage generative models to add
visual distractors [71, 38]. These can improve robustness to
visual distractors but do not address physical or dynamic
disturbances, as these require producing actions not present
in the data.
Fine-tuning Imitation with RL and Improving RL with
Demonstrations: Reinforcement learning has been used to

improve the performance of models originally trained with
imitation learning. RL has exploded in its capacity for finetuning LLMs [49] and image generation models [4], learning
rewards from human feedback [14]. In robotics, prior work
has explored techniques such as offline RL [70, 47, 33],
learning world models [42, 18], and online fine-tuning in the
real world [2, 3, 22, 70]. Expert demonstrations have also
been used to bootstrap exploration and policy learning with
RL [28, 27, 54, 74]. We similarly combine imitation and RL
to guide exploration in sparse reward settings. However, our
pipeline showcases how demonstrations additionally benefit
RL by biasing policies toward physically plausible solutions
that compensate for imperfect physics simulation.
Sim-to-real policy transfer: RL in simulation has been
used to synthesize impressive control policies in a variety
of domains such as locomotion [40, 34, 32], dexterous inhand manipulation [11, 12, 1, 23], and drone flight [61]. Many
simulation-based RL methods leverage some form of domain
randomization [65, 51], system identification [26, 63], or
improved simulator visuals [55, 24] to reduce the simulationto-reality (sim-to-real) domain gap. Prior work has also shown
the benefit of “teacher-student” distillation [12, 32, 60, 9],
wherein privileged “teacher” policies learned quickly with RL
are distilled into “student” policies that operate on sensor
observations. To acquire transferable controllers, we similarly
leverage GPU-accelerated simulation, teacher-student training,
and domain randomization across parallel environments. However, we address the more challenging scenario of household
manipulation, which is characterized by richer visual scenes,
and minimize the necessary engineering effort by relying on
sparse rewards. We also simplify sim-to-real by training on
digital twin assets and co-training with real data [67].
Real-to-sim transfer of scenes: Designing realistic simulation environments has been studied from the perspective
of synthesizing digital assets that reflect real objects. Prior
work has used tools from 3D reconstruction [29] and inverse
graphics [10] for creating digital twins, and such real-to-sim
pipelines have been used for both rigid and deformable [62]
objects. These approaches are all compatible with our system
and could be used to automate real-to-sim scene transfer and
reduce human effort. Our work similarly leverages advancements in 3D vision [64] for reconstructing object geometry,
but we also introduce an easy-to-use GUI for building a
URDF/USD with accurate articulations. Furthermore, our GUI
could be used to improve the aforementioned methods by
making it easier to collect a large dataset of human-annotated
articulated scenes. The accuracy of the simulator could be
improved further combining our GUI with the latest system
identification research [41, 35].
Real-to-sim-to-real transfer: Prior work has used
NeRF [43] and other 3D reconstruction techniques to create
realistic scene representations for improving manipulation
[73], navigation [16, 8] and locomotion [7]. These works,
however, only use the visual component of the synthetic
scene and do not involve any physical interaction with a
reconstructed geometry. As a result, these systems cannot

adjust to environmental changes beyond visual distractions.
For instance, different grasp poses may require different
placements, and a policy cannot discover these novel
behaviors without physically interacting with the environment
during training. A limited number of works have learned
policies that interact with the reconstructed environments,
but they either simplify the reconstructed shapes [37] or are
limited to simple grasp motions [68].
III. R IALT O : A R EAL - TO -S IM - TO -R EAL S YSTEM FOR
ROBUST ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION
A. System Overview
Our goal is to obtain a control policy that maps real-world
sensory observations to robot actions. We only assume access
to a small set of demonstrations (∼ 15) containing (observation, action) trajectories collected by an expert, although in
principle RialTo can also be used to robustify large, expressive
pretrained models as well. Our approach robustifies real-world
imitation learning policies using simulation-based RL to make
learned controllers robust to disturbances and distractors not
present in the demos. The proposed pipeline, RialTo, achieves
this with four main steps (Fig 1):
1) We construct geometrically, visually, and kinematically
accurate simulation environments from real-world image
capture. We leverage 3D reconstruction tools and develop
an easy-to-use graphical interface for adding articulations
and physical properties.
2) We obtain a set of successful trajectories containing privileged information (such as Lagrangian state, e.g. object
and joint poses) in simulation. We propose an “inverse
distillation” algorithm to transfer a policy learned from
real-world demonstrations to create a dataset of trajectories
(i.e., demos) in the simulation environment.
3) The synthesized simulation demos bootstrap efficient finetuning with RL in simulation using an easy-to-design
sparse reward function and low-dimensional state space,
with added randomization to make the policy robust to
environmental variations.
4) The learned policy is transferred to reality by distilling a
state-based simulation policy into a policy operating from
raw sensor observations available in the real world [9, 12].
During distillation, we also co-trained with the original
real-world demonstrations to capitalize on the combined
benefits of simulation-based robustification and in-domain
real-world data.
The following sections describe each component in detail,
along with a full system overview in Fig 1.

we have verified the approach with a variety of scanning apps
(e.g., Polycam [52] and ARCode [15]) and 3D reconstruction
pipelines [64, 45], each of which convert a set of multi-view
2D images (or a video) into a textured 3D mesh. The raw mesh
denoted G, is typically exported as a single globally-unified
geometry, which is unsuitable for direct policy learning. Scene
objects are not separated and the kinematics of objects with
internal joints are not reflected. Physical parameters like mass
and friction are also required and unspecified. We therefore
further process the raw mesh G into a set of separate bodies/links {Gi }M
i=1 with kinematic relations K and physical
parameters P.
While there are various automated techniques for automatically segmenting and adding articulations to meshes [29],
in this work, we take a simple human-centric approach. We
offer a simple graphical interface for humans to quickly
separate meshes and add articulations (see Fig. 2). Our GUI
allows users to upload their own meshes and drag/drop,
reposition, and reorient them in the global scene. Users can
then separate meshes and add joints between different mesh
elements, allowing objects like drawers, fridges, and cabinets
to be scanned and processed. Importantly, our interface is
lightweight, intuitive, and requires minimal domain-specific
knowledge. We conducted a study (Section VI) evaluating
six non-expert users’ experiences with the GUI and found
they could scan complex scenes and populate them with a
couple of articulated objects in under 15 minutes of active
interaction time. Examples of real-world environments with
their corresponding digital twins are shown in Fig 4 and
Appendix Fig. 16.
The next question is —how do we infer the physics
parameters that faithfully replicate the real world? While
accurately identifying physical parameters is possible, this can
be challenging without considerable interaction [5, 69]. While
adapting to dynamics variations is an important direction for
future work, in this system we set a single default value for
mass and friction uniformly across objects and compensate for
the sim-to-real gap to actual real-world values by constraining
the learned policy to be close to a small number of real-world
demonstrations as discussed in Section III-C.
This procedure produces a scene S = {{Gi }M
i=1 , K, P}
represented in a USD/URDF file that references the separated
meshes and their respective geometric (Gi }M
i=1 ), kinematics
(K) and physical parameters (P). This environment can subsequently be used for large-scale policy robustification in
simulation.

B. Real-to-Sim Transfer for Scalable Scene Generation

C. Robustifying Real-World Imitation Learning Policies in
Simulation

The first step of RialTo is to construct geometrically,
visually, and kinematically realistic simulated scenes for policy
training. This requires (i) generating accurate textured 3D
geometry from real-world images and (ii) specifying articulations and physical parameters. For geometry reconstruction,
we use existing off-the-shelf 3-D reconstruction techniques.
Our pipeline is agnostic to the particular method used, and

Given the simulation environment generated in Section
III-B, the next step in RialTo involves learning a robust
policy in simulation that can solve desired tasks from a
wide variety of configurations and environmental conditions.
While this can be done by training policies from scratch in
simulation, this is often a prohibitively slow process, requiring
considerable manual engineering. Instead, we will adopt a

3D reconstruction

Scene reconstruction GUI

(NeRFStudio, ARCode,
Polycam)
Upload/Scale/Move scene

Cut mesh

Upload more objects

Articulated USD
Add joint

Fig. 2. Overview of the real-to-sim pipeline for transfering scenes to the simulator. The first stage consists of scanning the environment, using off-theshelf tools such as NeRFStudio, ARCode, or Polycam. Each has its strengths and weaknesses and should be used appropriately (see Appendix XII for
recommendations). The second stage consists of uploading the reconstructed scene into RialTo’s GUI where the user can cut the mesh, specify joints, and
organize the scene as desired. Once complete, the scene can be downloaded as a USD asset, which can be directly imported into the simulator.

Learning from
the real world

1

2 Simulation transfer

3 RL ﬁne-tuning

Real-world
demos

ot
∩

{at, et, ot }

point
cloud

3D
Conv
MLP

et

ee pose

Rollout
Simulated
Scene

point
cloud

Vision-based
policy

ee
pose

Collect fully
simulated trajectory

Vision-based
policy

ot

Dreal

et

{a1, e1, x1,
...
aT, eT, xT }

xt

ai: action (ee pose)
ei: ee pose
xi: object poses

Train with
Supervised
Learning

et

ee
pose

State-based
policy

MLP

Succeeded

PPO with
BC loss

Failed

atʼ

object
poses

Simulated
Scene

Privileged information
demos

atʼ

Fig. 3.
Inverse distillation & RL fine-tuning. We introduce a novel procedure for going from point cloud-based policies trained from real-world
demonstrations Dreal to a robust privileged state-based policy in simulation. 1) Train a vision-based policy with supervised learning on Dreal 2) Rollout
the vision-based policy on the simulation rendered point clouds and collect a set of 15 privileged demonstrations with object poses, Dsim 3) Train a robust
state-based policy with RL and a sparse reward, adding a BC loss fitting Dsim to bias exploration and set a prior on real-world-transferable policies.

fine-tuning-based approach, using reinforcement learning in
simulation to fine-tune a policy initialized from a small number
of expert demonstrations collected in the real world. Since
training RL directly from visual observations is challenging,
we would ideally like to finetune simulation policies that
are based on a privileged Lagrangian state. However, realworld demonstrations do not have access to the low-level state
information in the environment. To enable the bootstrapping of
RL finetuning in simulation from a privileged state using realworld demonstrations, we introduce a novel “inverse distillation” (Section III-C1) procedure that is able to take real-world
demonstrations with only raw sensor observations and actions
and transfer them to simulation demonstrations, complete
with low-level privileged state information. These privileged

information demonstrations can then be used to instantiate an
efficient RL-based fine-tuning procedure (Section III-C2) in
simulation to massively improve policy robustness.
1) Inverse-distillation from Real-to-Sim for Privileged Policy Transfer: We assume a human provides a small
number of demonstrations in the real world Dreal =
{(oi1 , ai1 ), . . . , (oiH , aiH )}N
i=1 , where trajectories contain observations o (3D point clouds) and actions a (delta end-effector
pose). Considering that simulation-based RL fine-tuning is far
more efficient and performant when operating from a compact
state representation [32, 11] (see Section V-C) and we wish to
use real-world human demonstrations to avoid the difficulties
with running RL from scratch (see Section V-B), we want to
transfer our observation-action demonstrations from the real

world to simulation in a way that allows for subsequent RL
fine-tuning in simulation from compact state-based representations. This presents a challenge because we do not have
an explicit state estimation system that provides a Lagrangian
state for the collected demonstrations in the real world. We
instead introduce a procedure, called “inverse-distillation”, for
converting our real-world set of demonstrations into a set of
trajectories in simulation that are paired with privileged lowlevel state information.
Given the demonstrations Dreal , we can naturally train a
policy πreal (a|o) on this dataset via imitation learning. “Inverse distillation” involves executing this perception-based
learned policy πreal (a|o) in simulation, based on simulated sensor observations o, to collect a dataset Dsim =
{(oi1 , ai1 , si1 ) . . . , (oiH , aiH , siH )}M
i=1 of successful trajectories
which contain privileged state information sit . The key insight
here is that while we do not have access to the Lagrangian
state in the real-world demonstrations when a learned realworld imitation policy is executed from perceptual inputs in
simulation, low-level privileged Lagrangian state information
can naturally be collected from the simulation as well since the
pairing between perceptual observations and Lagrangian state
is known apriori in simulation. Since the goal is to improve
beyond the real-world imitation policy πreal (a|o), we can then
perform RL fine-tuning, incorporating the privileged demonstration dataset Dsim into the training process, as discussed in
the following subsection.
2) Reinforcement Learning Fine-tuning in Simulation:
Given the privileged information dataset Dsim , and the constructed simulation environment the goal is to learn a robust
∗
policy πsim
(a|s) using reinforcement learning. There are two
key challenges in doing so in a scalable way: (1) resolving
exploration challenges with minimal reward engineering, and
(2) ensuring the policy learns behaviors that will transfer
to the real world. ‘ We find that both challenges can be
addressed by a simple demonstration augmented reinforcement
learning procedure [60, 46, 54], using the Lagrangian statebased dataset Dsim . To avoid reward engineering, we define a
simple reward function that detects if the scene is in a desired
goal state (detailed sparse reward functions used in each task in
Appendix VIII). We build on the proximal policy optimization
[59] algorithm with the addition of an imitation learning loss
as follows (where Ât is the estimator of the advantage function
at step t [59], and Vϕ is the learned value function):
X

max α
θ,ϕ

min(

(st ,at ,rt )∈τπθ

clip(
+β

πθ (at |st )
Ât ,
πθold (at |st )

(st ,Vttarg )∈τπθ

+γ

D. Teacher-Student Distillation with Co-Training on RealWorld Data for Sim-to-Real Transfer
In previous sections, we described a method for efficiently
∗
learning a robust policy πsim
(a|s) in simulation using privileged state information. However, in the real world, this privileged information is unavailable. Policy deployment requires
operating directly from sensory observations (such as point
clouds) in the environment. To achieve this, we build on
the framework of teacher-student distillation (with interactive
DAgger labeling)[57, 12] where the privileged information
∗
policy πsim
(a|s) serves as a teacher and the perceptual policy
∗
πreal (a|o) is the student. Since there is inevitable domain shift
between simulation and real domains, this training procedure
can be further augmented by co-training the distillation objective with a mix of the original real-world demonstration
∗
data Dreal and simulation data drawn from πsim
(a|s) (via the
DAgger objective [12]). This results in the following cotraining objective for teacher-student policy learning:
X

max α
θ

(si ,oi ,ai )∼τπθ

+β

πθ (πteacher (si )|oi )
P
ac πθ (ac |oi )

X
(oi ,ai )∈Dreal

π (a |o )
P θ i i
ac πθ (ac |oi )

(2)

Here the first term corresponds to DAgger training in
simulation, while the second term co-trains on real-world
expert data. This allows the policy to take advantage of
small amounts of high-quality real-world data to bridge the
perceptual gap between simulation and real-world scenes and
improve generalization compared to only using the data from
simulation. We empirically demonstrate (Section III-D) that
this significantly increases the resulting success rate in the real
world. On a practical note, we refer the reader to Appendix IX
for additional details on the student-teacher training scheme
that enables it to be successful in the proposed problem setting.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

old

πθ (at |st )
, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ât )
πθold (at |st )
X
(Vϕ (st ) − Vttarg )2

In addition to mitigating issues associated with exploration [46, 54], leveraging the additional imitation learning
term in the objective helps bias the policy toward physically
plausible, safe solutions that improve transfer of behaviors to
reality. During this process, we can train the policy for robustness by randomizing initial robot/object/goal poses. Appendix
VIII contains complete details of our training procedure. The
∗
result is a robust policy πsim
(a|s) operating from Lagrangian
state that is successful from a wide variety of configurations
and environmental conditions.

(1)

Our experiments are designed to answer the following
questions about RialTo: (a) Does RialTo provide real-world
policies robust to variations in configurations, appearance, and
disturbances? (b) Does co-training policies with real-world

old

X
(si ,ai )∈Dsim

π (a |s )
P θ i i
ac πθ (ac |si )

For the sake of this work, we will assume that the optimal actions for the
student and teacher coincide, and there are no information gathering specific
challenges induced by partial observability [60]

Plate on rack

Book on shelf

Mug on shelf

Open Drawer

Open cabinet

Task
Randomization

Cluttered with
distrubances

Simulation

Original

Open toaster

Fig. 4. We depict the six tasks used to evaluate RialTo. From top to bottom, we first show the original environment where we collect the demonstrations,
second the simulated environment, third the environment where we do our final evaluation containing clutter and disturbances, and fourth the task randomization
overview each shaded area corresponds to an approximation of how much randomization each object/robot have.

data benefit real-world evaluation performance? (c) Is the realto-sim transfer of scenes and policies necessary for training
efficiency and the resulting performance? (d) Does RialTo
scale up to more in-the-wild scenes?
To answer these questions, we evaluate RialTo in eight
different tasks, shown in Figure 4 and 8. These include 6-DoF
grasping and reorientation of free objects (book on a shelf,
plate on a rack, mug on a shelf ) and 6-DoF grasping and
interacting with articulated objects (drawer and cabinet) on a
tabletop and opening a toaster, plate on a rack, putting a cup
in the trash in more uncontrolled scenes. More details on the
tasks such as their sparse reward functions and randomization
setups are presented in Appendix VIII. For each task, we
consider three different disturbance levels in increasing order
of difficulty (see Appendix VIII for more details):
1) Randomizing object poses: at the beginning of each
episode we randomize the object and/or robot poses.
2) Adding visual distractors: at the beginning of each
episode we also add visual distractors in a cluttered way.
3) Applying physical disturbances: we apply physical disturbances throughout the episode rollout. We change
the pose of the object being manipulated or the target
location where the object needs to be placed, close the
drawer/toaster/cabinet being manipulated, and move the

robot base when possible.
We conduct our experiments on a Franka Panda arm with
the default parallel jaw gripper, using 6 DoF Cartesian end
effector position control. For perceptual inputs, we obtain
3D point cloud observations from a single calibrated depth
camera. More details on the hardware setup can be found in
Appendix X. All of the results in the real world are evaluated
using the best policy obtained for each method, we report
the average across at least 10 rollouts and the bootstrapped
standard deviation. Videos of highlights and evaluation runs
are available in the website.
Throughout the next sections, we will evaluate RialTo
against the following set of baselines and ablations: 1) Imitation learning from 15 and 50 demos (Section IV-A); 2) No
co-training on real-world data (Section IV-B); 3) Co-training
on demonstrations in simulation (Section IV-B); 4) RialTo
from simulation demos (Section IV-C2); 5) Learning from an
untargeted set of simulated assets (Section IV-C1); 6) RialTo
without distractors (Section V-A); 7) RialTo without demos
(Section V-B)
A. RialTo Learns Robust Policies via Real-to-Sim-to-Real
In this section, we aim to understand whether RialTo
can solve complex tasks, showing robustness to variations in

Disturbances

Distractors

Pose
randomization

Kitchen toaster

Book on shelf

Plate on rack

Mug on shelf

Open drawer

Open cabinet

90

90

90

100

90

85

30

10

10

10

40

50

90

70

60

70

90

80

0

0

0

50

0

60

50

80

90

80

0

0

0

20

90

20

10

0

Success Rate
100

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

RialTo

Imitation learning

Fig. 5. Comparison of RialTo against imitation learning both from 15 demonstrations. RialTo provides robust policies across tasks and levels of distractions
while imitation learning severely suffers when adding distractors and disturbances.

configurations, disturbances, and distractors. We compare our
approach of real-to-sim-to-real RL fine-tuning against a policy
trained only on real-world demos via standard imitation learning (BC). We report the results of running RialTo’s pipeline
starting from 15 demos collected directly in simulation and cotraining with 15 real-world demos during the teacher-student
distillation. In Section IV-C2 we show a comparison of running
RialTo uniquely on real or sim demos.
The results in Figure 5 show RialTo maintains high performance across configuration levels, achieving on average 91%
success across tasks for randomizing object poses, 77% with
distractors, and 75% with disturbances. On the other hand,
the presence of distractors and disturbances severely reduces
the performance of pure imitation learning. For instance,
when only randomizing the object poses, the BC baseline
achieves an average of 25% success rate across tasks. Under
more challenging conditions, the BC baseline drops to 11%
and 5% overall performance on average for distractors and
disturbances, respectively.
Figure 1, 10 and the videos in the website qualitatively
show how the resulting policies are robust to many kinds of
environment perturbations, including moving the robot, moving the manipulated object and target positions, and adding
visual distractors that cause occlusion and distribution shift.
The policy rollouts also demonstrate error recovery capabilities, correcting the robot’s behavior in closed loop when,
e.g., objects are misaligned or a grasp must be reattempted.
This highlights that RialTo provides robustness that does not
emerge by purely learning from demonstrations.
We also compare RialTo against behavior cloning with 50
demonstrations to show that the problem is not simply one
of slightly more data. Collecting the 50 demonstrations takes
a total time of 1 hour and 45 minutes, which is significantly

BC (15 demos)
BC (50 demos)
RialTo (15 demos)

Only randomization

Distractors

Disturbances

10 ± 9%
40 ± 15%
90 ± 9%

0 ± 0%
30 ± 16%
70 ± 14%

0 ± 0%
20 ± 13%
60 ± 16%

TABLE I
R IALT O AND IMITATION LEARNING ON PLACING A BOOK ON THE SHELF.

more than the human effort for RialTo for which we collect 15
demos, in 30 minutes, and build the environment in 15 minutes
of active time (see Section VI). Although more data improves
the performance of direct imitation learning from 10% to 40%,
0% to 30%, and 0% to 20% for the three different levels of
robustness, the results in Table I show that RialTo achieves
approximately 2.5 times higher success rate than pure BC,
despite using less than one third the number of demonstrations
and taking less than half of the human supervision’s time.
B. Impact of Co-Training with Real-World Data
Next, we assess the benefits offered by co-training with
real-world demonstrations during teacher-student distillation,
rather than just purely training policies in simulation. We
consider the book on shelf, plate on rack, mug on shelf, and
open drawer tasks (the two first being two of the harder
tasks with lower overall performance). The results in Figure 6 illustrate that co-training the policy with 15 real-world
demonstrations significantly increases real-world performance
on some tasks(3.5x and 2x success rate increase for book on
shelf and plate on rack with disturbances, when comparing
co-training on real-world demos against co-training with sim
demos) while keeping the same performance on tasks that
already have a small sim-to-real gap. Qualitatively, we observe
the co-trained policy is more conservative and safer to execute.
For instance, the policy without co-training usually comes

Disturbances

Distractors

Pose
randomization

Plate on rack

Book on shelf

Open drawer

70

80

100

90

90

90

50

50

100

50

60

90

70

70

80

60

70

90

30

30

90

20

50

90

60

70

80

50

60

90

30

30

80

20

40

90

100

sim demos and
real co-training

50

100

50

100

50

real demos and
real co-training

sim demos and
sim co-training

only sim demos

Fig. 6.
Comparison between running RialTo on sim vs real data. The
performance on the methods doing co-training with real-world demos is higher
than using only simulated demos or no real-world co-training, on the harder
tasks( plate on rack and book on shelf ), and matches the performance in the
easier tasks( open drawer and mug on shelf ). Furthermore, starting from realworld or simulated demos does equally well.

very close to the plate or the book, occasionally causing
it to fall. The policy with co-training data, however, leaves
more space between the hand and the book before grasping,
which is closer to the demonstrated behavior. The observation
that sim co-training performs significantly worse than realworld co-training, indicates that co-training with real-world
demonstrations is helping in reducing the sim-to-real gap for
both the visual distribution shift between simulated and real
point clouds and the sim-to-real dynamics gap.
C. Is Real-to-Sim Transfer Necessary?
Objaverse Drawers

Open drawer success rate

Trained on target (RialTo)

Target

Trained on Objaverse

100

50

17

Simulated
Objaverse

81

90

10

Real world
Target

Fig. 7. Comparison between training with RialTo on the reconstruction of the
target drawer against training on a set of four drawers from Objaverse[17]. We
observe, that RialTo on the real-to-sim asset does significantly better (90%
vs 10%) when testing in the real world on the target drawer compared to
training on the set of randomized drawers.

1) Real-to-Sim Transfer of Scenes: Instead of reconstructing assets from the target environment, one could train a
policy on a diverse set of synthetic assets and hope the model
generalizes to the real-world target scene [12, 21, 66]. While
this has shown promising results for object-level manipulation,
such as in-hand reorientation [12], it is still an active area of
work for scene-level manipulation and rearrangement [21].
Moreover, such methods require significant effort in creating
a dataset of scenes and objects that enables the learned
policies to generalize. Acquiring a controller that can act in
many scenes is also a more challenging learning problem,
requiring longer wall clock time, more compute, and additional
engineering effort to train a performant policy on a larger and
more diverse training set.
To probe the benefits of RialTo over such a sim-only training pipeline, we compared the performance against a policy
trained using only synthetic assets. Using an amount of time
effort roughly comparable to what is required from a single
user following our real-to-sim approach (see Section VI), we
collected a set of 4 drawers from the Objaverse dataset (see
Figure 7). Although this is small compared to the growing
size of 3D object datasets, we found it non-trivial to transfer
articulated objects into simulation-ready USDs and we leave
it as future work. Given these manually constructed diverse
simulation scenes, we then trained a multi-task policy using
RialTo from 20 demonstrations to open the 4 drawers. See
Appendix IX-C for the minor modifications to incorporate
multi-task policy learning to RialTo.
As shown in Figure 7, when evaluating the real target
drawer, the policy trained on multiple drawers only achieves
a 10% success rate, much lower than the 90% obtained
by the policy trained on the target drawer in simulation.
This leads us to conclude that to train a generalist agent,
considerably more data and effort are needed as compared
to the relatively simple real-to-sim procedure we describe
for test time specialization. Moreover, this suggests that for
performance on particular deployment environments, targeted
generation of simulation environments via real-to-simulation
pipelines may be more effective than indiscriminate, diverse
procedural scene generation.
2) Real-to-sim transfer of policies: We additionally want to
understand the impact of transferring policies from real-world
demonstrations in comparison to running the pipeline starting
with demos collected directly in simulation. This helps analyze
whether instead of collecting demos both in simulation and
in the real world (for the co-training) we can simply collect
demos in the real world and do all the training with those.
Figure 6 shows the real-world performance of policies
trained using RialTo when starting the RL fine-tuning step
using real-world demonstrations as explained in III-C1 against
using demonstrations provided directly in simulation. We
observe that the performance for both cases is very close.
These results show that RialTo successfully learns policies
with demonstrations from either source of supervision as long
as we keep co-training the policies with real-world data in the
teacher-student distillation step. Firstly, this indicates that we

Pose Randomization

Distractors

60 ± 15%
100 ± 0%

30 ± 15%
70 ± 15%

RialTo without distractor training
RialTo with distractor training

TABLE II
R EAL -W ORLD PERFORMANCE OF POLICIES TRAINED WITH AND WITHOUT
DISTRACTORS ON THE TASK OF PLACING A MUG ON A SHELF.

do not need to collect both demos in sim and real, but we
can run RialTo uniquely from the demos in the real world.
Furthermore, this flexibility is a strength of our pipeline, as
the ease of acquiring different sources of supervision may
vary across deployment scenarios – i.e., one could use policies
pretrained from large-scale real-world data or obtain data from
a simulation-based crowdsourcing platform.

Cup in trash

B. Comparison to RL from Scratch
We hypothesize two key advantages of incorporating
demonstrations in the finetuning process: (1) aiding exploration, and (2) biasing the policy toward behaviors that transfer
well to reality. Results in Table III show that training from PPO
from scratch fails (0% success) in three out of five tasks and
much poorer performance in the other two tasks. On tasks
with non-zero success, we observed that the policy exploits
simulator inaccuracies and learns behaviors that are unlikely
to transfer to reality. (see Appendix Fig. 15). For example,
the PPO policy opens the toaster by pushing on the bottom of
the toaster, leveraging the slight misplacement of the joint on
the toaster. Such behaviors are unsafe and would not transfer
to reality, underlining the importance of using demonstrations
during policy robustification.

D. Scaling RialTo to In-the-Wild Environments

Open toaster

robust policy that succeeds even in visual clutter. We analyze
how this affects the final robustness of the learned policy.
For the sake of analysis, we consider the performance on the
mug on the shelf task. The small size of the mug and its
resemblance in shape and size to other daily objects make the
visual component of this task particularly challenging when
other objects are also present. Our findings in Table II show
that adding distractors during training increases the success
rate from 30% to 70% when testing the policy in environments
with distractors. We also observe a performance improvement
in setups with no distractors suggesting that such training also
supports better sim-to-real policy transfer.

Dish in rack

Cup in trash

C. RL from Vision
Success rate

100

50

90

90

30

RialTo

30

50

0

Imitation learning

Fig. 8. We test RialTo on uncontrolled and in-the-wild scenes, and we see we
can continue to solve a variety of tasks more robustly than imitation learning
techniques.

In this section, we scale up RialTo to more uncontrolled and
in-the-wild environments. We test RialTo on three different
tasks: open the microwave in a kitchen (also shown in Section
IV-A), put a cup in the trash, and bring the plate from
the sink to the dishrack. We observe that RialTo scales
up to these more diverse scenes and continues to perform
significantly better than standard imitation learning techniques.
In particular, RialTo brings on average a 57% improvement
upon standard imitation learning, see Fig 8.
V. F URTHER A NALYSIS AND A BLATIONS
A. Training with Distractors
When performing teacher-student distillation we performed
randomization with additional visual distractors to train a more

RialTo’s “inverse distillation” procedure to a compact statespace adds some methodological overhead to the system when
compared to the possibility of doing RL fine-tuning directly
on visual observations. However, as reported in Appendix
Fig. 14, on the task of drawer opening, RL from compact
states achieves a 96% success rate after 12 hours of wallclock time, while RL from vision only achieves a 1% success
rate after 35 hours. Hence, inverse distilling to state space is
necessary because training RL from vision with sparse rewards
is prohibitively slow, motivating the methodology outlined in
Section III-C1.
VI. U SER STUDY
We analyzed the usability of RialTo’s pipeline for bringing
real-world scenes to simulation. We ran a user study over
6 people, User 6 being an expert who used the GUI before
and Users 1-5 never did any work on simulators before. Each
participant was tasked with creating an articulated scene using
the provided GUI. More precisely, their task was to: 1) scan
a big scene, 2) cut one object, 3) scan and upload a smaller
object, and 4) add a joint to the scene. From Figure 9, we
found that the average total time to create a scene was 25
minutes and 12 seconds of which only 14 minutes and 40
seconds were active work. We also observed that the expert
user accomplished the task faster than the rest, and twice as
fast as the slowest user. This indicates that with practice, our

RL from scratch with 0 demos
RL fine-tuning from 15 real demos
RL fine-tuning from 15 sim demos

Open
toaster

Book on
shelf

Plate on
rack

Mug on
shelf

Open
drawer

62 ± 2%
91 ± 1%
96 ± 1%

0 ± 0%
90 ± 1%
89 ± 1%

2 ± 0%
81 ± 2%
82 ± 2%

0 ± 0%
81 ± 2%
82 ± 2%

0 ± 0%
96 ± 1%
95 ± 1%

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF TRAINING RL FROM SCRATCH AGAINST RL FROM REAL AND SIM DEMOS . RL FROM SIM AND REAL DEMOS SEEM TO BE EQUIVALENT
IN MOST CASES , BUT RL FROM SCRATCH BARELY SOLVES THE TASK .

GUI allows users to become faster at generating scenes. We
conclude that doing the real-to-sim transfer of the scenes using
the proposed GUI seems to be an intuitive process that is
neither time nor labor-intensive when compared to collecting
many demonstrations in the real world. We provide more
details about the study in Appendix XIII.
User 1

19:46

User 2

16:30

User 3

16:07

User 4

12:27

User 5

12:17

User 6

10:54

0

5

10

15

20

Scan Time

Joint Time

2nd Scan Time

Cut Time

25

30

35

40

Minutes

Scan Processing
& Uploading Time
10:54

Total Active Time

Fig. 9. 3D reconstruction GUI’s user study breakdown times. On average it
takes 14 minutes and 40 seconds of active time or 25 minutes and 12 seconds
of total time to create a scene through our proposed pipeline.

VII. L IMITATIONS AND C ONCLUSION
Limitations: While our use of 3D point clouds instead of
RGB enables easier sim-to-real transfer, we require accurate
depth sensors that can struggle to detect thin, transparent,
and reflective objects. Future work may investigate applying
RialTo to train policies that operate on RGB images or RGBD,
as our framework makes no fundamental assumptions that
prevent using different sensor modalities. We are also limited
to training policies for tasks that can be easily simulated and
for real-world objects that can be turned into digital assets.
Currently, this is primarily limited to articulated rigid bodies,
but advancements in simulating and representing deformables
should allow our approach to be applied to more challenging objects. Even though we show RialTo works on fast
controllers, these are still relatively slow to minimize the
sim-to-real gap in dynamics, thereafter there is potential to
investigate tasks for which faster controllers are needed. In
this work, we consider relatively quasistatic problems, where
exact identification of physics parameters is not necessary
for the constructed simulation. This will become important
as more complex environments are encountered. Finally, as
we explain in Section XIV, RialTo currently takes around 2

days of wall-clock time end-to-end to train a policy for each
task, this time bottleneck makes continual learning infeasible
and understanding how to obtain policies faster with minimal
human supervision would be valuable. We expect with more
efficient techniques for learning with point clouds and better
parallelization, this procedure can be sped up significantly.
Conclusion: This work presents RialTo, a system for
acquiring policies that are robust to environmental variations and disturbances on real-world deployment. Our system
achieves robustness through the complementary strengths of
real-world imitation learning and large-scale RL on digital
twin simulations constructed on the fly. Our results show that
by importing 3-D reconstructions of real scenes into simulation
and collecting a small amount of demonstration data, nonexpert users can program manipulation controllers that succeed
under challenging conditions with minimal human effort,
showing enhanced levels of robustness and generalization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Improbable AI Lab
and the WEIRD Lab members for their valuable feedback and
support in developing this project. In particular, we would like
to acknowledge Antonia Bronars and Jacob Berg for helpful
suggestions on improving the clarity of the manuscript, and
Marius Memmel for providing valuable insights on learning
from point clouds in the early stages of the project. This work
was partly supported by the Sony Research Award, the US
Government, and Hyundai Motor Company.
Author Contributions
Marcel Torne conceived the overall project goals, investigated how to obtain real-to-sim transfer of scenes and policies,
and robustly do sim-to-real transfer of policies, wrote all the
code for the policy learning pipeline and RialTo’s GUI for
real-to-sim transfer of scenes, ran simulation and real-world
experiments, wrote the paper, and was the primary author of
the paper.
Anthony Simeonov helped with setting up the robot hardware, made technical suggestions on learning policies from
point clouds, helped with the task of placing the plate on the
rack, and actively helped with writing the paper.
Zechu Li assisted in the early stage of conceiving the
project and helped develop RialTo’s GUI for the real-to-sim
transfer of the scenes.
April Chan led the user study experiments to analyze
RialTo’s GUI.

Tao Chen provided valuable insights and recommendations
on sim-to-real transfer.
Abhishek Gupta was involved in conceiving the goals
of the project, assisted with finding the scope of the paper,
suggested baselines and ablations, played an active role in
writing the paper and co-advised the project.
Pulkit Agrawal suggested the idea of doing real-to-sim
transfer of scenes, was involved in conceiving the goals of
the project, suggested baselines and ablations, helped edit the
paper, and co-advised the project.
R EFERENCES
[1] OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek
Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew, Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell,
Alex Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39
(1):3–20, 2020.
[2] Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey
Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning with
offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02948, 2023.
[3] Max Balsells, Marcel Torne, Zihan Wang, Samedh Desai,
Pulkit Agrawal, and Abhishek Gupta. Autonomous
robotic reinforcement learning with asynchronous human
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20608, 2023.
[4] Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov,
and Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301,
2023.
[5] Jeannette Bohg, Karol Hausman, Bharath Sankaran,
Oliver Brock, Danica Kragic, Stefan Schaal, and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Interactive perception: Leveraging
action in perception and perception in action. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 33(6):1273–1291, 2017.
[6] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana
Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine
Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
[7] Arunkumar Byravan, Jan Humplik, Leonard Hasenclever,
Arthur Brussee, Francesco Nori, Tuomas Haarnoja, Ben
Moran, Steven Bohez, Fereshteh Sadeghi, Bojan Vujatovic, et al. Nerf2real: Sim2real transfer of vision-guided
bipedal motion skills using neural radiance fields. In
2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 9362–9369. IEEE, 2023.
[8] Matthew Chang, Theophile Gervet, Mukul Khanna, Sriram Yenamandra, Dhruv Shah, So Yeon Min, Kavit Shah,
Chris Paxton, Saurabh Gupta, Dhruv Batra, et al. Goat:
Go to any thing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06430, 2023.
[9] Dian Chen, Brady Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp
Krähenbühl. Learning by cheating. In Conference on
Robot Learning, pages 66–75. PMLR, 2020.
[10] Qiuyu Chen, Marius Memmel, Alex Fang, Aaron Walsman, Dieter Fox, and Abhishek Gupta. Urdformer:
Constructing interactive realistic scenes from real images

via simulation and generative modeling. In Towards
Generalist Robots: Learning Paradigms for Scalable
Skill Acquisition@ CoRL2023, 2023.
[11] Tao Chen, Jie Xu, and Pulkit Agrawal. A system for
general in-hand object re-orientation. In Conference on
Robot Learning, pages 297–307. PMLR, 2022.
[12] Tao Chen, Megha Tippur, Siyang Wu, Vikash Kumar, Edward Adelson, and Pulkit Agrawal. Visual dexterity: Inhand reorientation of novel and complex object shapes.
Science Robotics, 8(84):eadc9244, 2023.
[13] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric
Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action
diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137, 2023.
[14] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic,
Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement
learning from human preferences. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[15] AR Code. Ar code. https://ar-code.com/, 2022.
[16] Matt Deitke, Rose Hendrix, Ali Farhadi, Kiana Ehsani,
and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Phone2proc: Bringing robust
robots into our chaotic world. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 9665–9675, 2023.
[17] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca
Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt,
Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi.
Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13142–13153,
2023.
[18] Yunhai Feng, Nicklas Hansen, Ziyan Xiong, Chandramouli Rajagopalan, and Xiaolong Wang. Finetuning
offline world models in the real world. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.16029, 2023.
[19] Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A
Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian Wong,
Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson.
Implicit behavioral cloning. In Conference on Robot
Learning, pages 158–168. PMLR, 2022.
[20] Peter Florence, Lucas Manuelli, and Russ Tedrake. Selfsupervised correspondence in visuomotor policy learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):492–
499, 2019.
[21] Ran Gong, Jiangyong Huang, Yizhou Zhao, Haoran
Geng, Xiaofeng Gao, Qingyang Wu, Wensi Ai, Ziheng Zhou, Demetri Terzopoulos, Song-Chun Zhu, et al.
Arnold: A benchmark for language-grounded task learning with continuous states in realistic 3d scenes. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.04321, 2023.
[22] Abhishek Gupta, Justin Yu, Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar,
Aaron Rovinsky, Kelvin Xu, Thomas Devlin, and Sergey
Levine. Reset-free reinforcement learning via multitask learning: Learning dexterous manipulation behaviors
without human intervention. In 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages

6664–6671. IEEE, 2021.
[23] Ankur Handa, Arthur Allshire, Viktor Makoviychuk,
Aleksei Petrenko, Ritvik Singh, Jingzhou Liu, Denys
Makoviichuk, Karl Van Wyk, Alexander Zhurkevich,
Balakumar Sundaralingam, et al. Dextreme: Transfer
of agile in-hand manipulation from simulation to reality.
In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 5977–5984. IEEE, 2023.
[24] Daniel Ho, Kanishka Rao, Zhuo Xu, Eric Jang, Mohi
Khansari, and Yunfei Bai. Retinagan: An object-aware
approach to sim-to-real transfer. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 10920–10926. IEEE, 2021.
[25] Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan,
and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A survey of
learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50
(2):1–35, 2017.
[26] Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dario
Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco
Hutter. Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for
legged robots. Science Robotics, 4(26):eaau5872, 2019.
[27] Stephen James and Andrew J Davison. Q-attention:
Enabling efficient learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(2):
1612–1619, 2022.
[28] Stephen James, Kentaro Wada, Tristan Laidlow, and
Andrew J Davison. Coarse-to-fine q-attention: Efficient
learning for visual robotic manipulation via discretisation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 13739–
13748, 2022.
[29] Zhenyu Jiang, Cheng-Chun Hsu, and Yuke Zhu. Ditto:
Building digital twins of articulated objects from interaction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5616–
5626, 2022.
[30] Michael Kazhdan, Matthew Bolitho, and Hugues Hoppe.
Poisson surface reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
fourth Eurographics symposium on Geometry processing,
volume 7, 2006.
[31] Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238–1274, 2013.
[32] Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra
Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for legged robots.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04034, 2021.
[33] Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey
Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:1179–1191, 2020.
[34] Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen,
Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning quadrupedal
locomotion over challenging terrain. Science robotics, 5
(47):eabc5986, 2020.
[35] Vincent Lim, Huang Huang, Lawrence Yunliang Chen,
Jonathan Wang, Jeffrey Ichnowski, Daniel Seita, Michael

Laskey, and Ken Goldberg. Planar robot casting with
real2sim2real self-supervised learning, 2022. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2111.04814.
[36] Yixin Lin, Austin S. Wang, Giovanni Sutanto, Akshara Rai, and Franziska Meier. Polymetis. https:
//facebookresearch.github.io/fairo/polymetis/, 2021.
[37] Naijun Liu, Yinghao Cai, Tao Lu, Rui Wang, and Shuo
Wang. Real–sim–real transfer for real-world robot control policy learning with deep reinforcement learning.
Applied Sciences, 10(5):1555, 2020.
[38] Zhao Mandi, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Vincent Moens,
Shuran Song, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Vikash Kumar.
Cacti: A framework for scalable multi-task
multi-scene visual imitation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.05711, 2022.
[39] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush
Nasiriany, Chen Wang, Rohun Kulkarni, Li Fei-Fei,
Silvio Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n.
What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipulation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
[40] Gabriel B Margolis, Ge Yang, Kartik Paigwar, Tao Chen,
and Pulkit Agrawal. Rapid locomotion via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02824, 2022.
[41] Marius Memmel, Andrew Wagenmaker, Chuning Zhu,
Patrick Yin, Dieter Fox, and Abhishek Gupta. Asid:
Active exploration for system identification in robotic
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12308, 2024.
[42] Russell Mendonca, Shikhar Bahl, and Deepak Pathak.
Structured world models from human videos. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.10901, 2023.
[43] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for
view synthesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–
106, 2021.
[44] Mayank Mittal, Calvin Yu, Qinxi Yu, Jingzhou Liu,
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Jia Lin Yuan, Ritvik Singh,
Yunrong Guo, Hammad Mazhar, et al. Orbit: A unified
simulation framework for interactive robot learning environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023.
[45] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and
Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives
with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Trans.
Graph., 41(4):102:1–102:15, July 2022.
doi: 10.
1145/3528223.3530127. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3528223.3530127.
[46] Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcoming exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations.
In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and
automation (ICRA), pages 6292–6299. IEEE, 2018.
[47] Ashvin Nair, Abhishek Gupta, Murtaza Dalal, and
Sergey Levine. Awac: Accelerating online reinforcement learning with offline datasets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09359, 2020.

[48] NVIDIA.
Nvidia
isaac-sim.
https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac-sim, May 2022.
[49] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[50] Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder,
Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. Convolutional
occupancy networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
2020, Proceedings, Part III 16, pages 523–540. Springer,
2020.
[51] Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech
Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of
robotic control with dynamics randomization. In 2018
IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 3803–3810. IEEE, 2018.
[52] Polycam. Polycam. https://poly.cam, 2020.
[53] Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi
Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dormann.
Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
22(268):1–8, 2021.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html.
[54] Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta,
Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel Todorov, and
Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.
[55] Kanishka Rao, Chris Harris, Alex Irpan, Sergey Levine,
Julian Ibarz, and Mohi Khansari. Rl-cyclegan: Reinforcement learning aware simulation-to-real. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 11157–11166, 2020.
[56] Nathan Ratliff, J Andrew Bagnell, and Siddhartha S
Srinivasa. Imitation learning for locomotion and manipulation. In 2007 7th IEEE-RAS International Conference
on Humanoid Robots, pages 392–397. IEEE, 2007.
[57] Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A
reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction
to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the
fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop
and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
[58] Stefan Schaal, Auke Ijspeert, and Aude Billard. Computational approaches to motor learning by imitation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B: Biological Sciences, 358(1431):537–547, 2003.
[59] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[60] Idan Shenfeld, Zhang-Wei Hong, Aviv Tamar, and Pulkit
Agrawal. Tgrl: An algorithm for teacher guided reinforcement learning. In International Conference on

Machine Learning, pages 31077–31093. PMLR, 2023.
[61] Yunlong Song, Angel Romero, Matthias Müller, Vladlen
Koltun, and Davide Scaramuzza. Reaching the limit
in autonomous racing: Optimal control versus reinforcement learning. Science Robotics, 8(82):eadg1462, 2023.
[62] Priya Sundaresan, Rika Antonova, and Jeannette Bohgl.
Diffcloud: Real-to-sim from point clouds with differentiable simulation and rendering of deformable objects. In
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 10828–10835. IEEE,
2022.
[63] Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Erwin Coumans, Atil Iscen,
Yunfei Bai, Danijar Hafner, Steven Bohez, and Vincent
Vanhoucke. Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for
quadruped robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.10332,
2018.
[64] Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li,
Brent Yi, Terrance Wang, Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake
Austin, Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, et al. Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural radiance field
development. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference
Proceedings, pages 1–12, 2023.
[65] Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider,
Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(IROS), pages 23–30. IEEE, 2017.
[66] Lirui Wang, Yiyang Ling, Zhecheng Yuan, Mohit Shridhar, Chen Bao, Yuzhe Qin, Bailin Wang, Huazhe Xu, and
Xiaolong Wang. Gensim: Generating robotic simulation
tasks via large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[67] Lirui Wang, Jialiang Zhao, Yilun Du, Edward H Adelson,
and Russ Tedrake. Poco: Policy composition from
and for heterogeneous robot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.02511, 2024.
[68] Luobin Wang, Runlin Guo, Quan Vuong, Yuzhe Qin, Hao
Su, and Henrik Christensen. A real2sim2real method for
robust object grasping with neural surface reconstruction.
In 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), pages 1–8. IEEE,
2023.
[69] Zhenjia Xu, Jiajun Wu, Andy Zeng, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Shuran Song. Densephysnet: Learning dense
physical object representations via multi-step dynamic
interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03853, 2019.
[70] Jingyun Yang, Max Sobol Mark, Brandon Vu, Archit
Sharma, Jeannette Bohg, and Chelsea Finn. Robot finetuning made easy: Pre-training rewards and policies for
autonomous real-world reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.15145, 2023.
[71] Tianhe Yu, Ted Xiao, Austin Stone, Jonathan Tompson,
Anthony Brohan, Su Wang, Jaspiar Singh, Clayton Tan,
Jodilyn Peralta, Brian Ichter, et al. Scaling robot learning
with semantically imagined experience. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2302.11550, 2023.
[72] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with
low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705,
2023.
[73] Allan Zhou, Moo Jin Kim, Lirui Wang, Pete Florence,
and Chelsea Finn. Nerf in the palm of your hand:
Corrective augmentation for robotics via novel-view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 17907–
17917, 2023.
[74] Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Aravind Rajeswaran,
Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning: Efficient,
general, and low-cost. In 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3651–3657.
IEEE, 2019.
[75] Henry Zhu, Justin Yu, Abhishek Gupta, Dhruv Shah,
Kristian Hartikainen, Avi Singh, Vikash Kumar, and
Sergey Levine. The ingredients of real-world robotic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12570,
2020.

Next, we provide additional details of our work. More
concretely:
Task Details VIII: provides more details on the tasks
used to evaluate RialTo and the baselines.
• Implementation Details IX: provides more detailed information on the exact hyperparameters such as network
architectures, point cloud processing, and dataset sizes
using in RialTo.
• Further Analysis XI: we provide further details on
RialTo, more concretely on running RL from vision, RL
from scratch and on the sim-to-real gap.
• Hardware Setup X: Details on the robot hardware and
cameras used for the experiments.
• GUI for Real-to-Sim Transfer of Scenes XII: We
provide further details on the GUI that we proposed
together with advice on which scanning methods to use
for each scenario.
• GUI User Study XIII: We explain how we ran the User
Study together with visualizations of the scanned scenes.
• Compute ResourcesXIV: We give details on the compute
used to run the experiments.

•

VIII. TASK DETAILS
In this section of the appendix, we describe additional
details about each task. Across tasks, the state space consists
of a concatenation of all of the poses of the objects present in
the scenes together with the states of the joints and the state
of the robot. The action space consists of a discretized endeffector delta pose of dimension 14. More concretely, we have
6 actions for the delta position, which moves ±0.03 meters
in each axis, 6 more actions for rotating ±0.2 radians in each
axis, and 2 final actions for opening and closing the gripper.
As we explain in Section III-B, we define a success function
that will be used for selecting successful trajectories in the
inverse distillation procedure and as a sparse reward in the
RL fine-tuning phase. Next, we specify which are the success
functions for each of the tasks:
Kitchen Toaster: success =
toaster joint > 0.65 && condition(gripper open)
• Open Drawer: success =
drawer joint > 0.1 && condition(gripper open)
• Open Cabinet: success =
cabinet joint > 0.1 && condition(gripper open)
• Plate on the rack: success =
||plate site − rack site||2 < 0.2 && rack y axis ·
plate z axis > 0.9 && condition(gripper open)
• Book on shelf: success =
||book site − shelf site||2 < 0.12
&& condition(gripper open)
• Mug on shelf: success =
||mug site − shelf site||2 < 0.12 && mug z axis ·
shelf z axis > 0.95 && condition(gripper open)
• Plate on the rack in the kitchen: success =
||plate site − rack site||2 < 0.2 && rack y axis ·
plate z axis > 0.9 && condition(gripper open)
•

•

Cup in trash: success = ||cup site−trash site||2 < 0.07
&& condition(gripper open)

A. Simulation details
For simulating each one of the tasks, we use the latest simulator from NVIDIA, IsaacSim [48]. Furthermore, to develop
our code we were inspired by the Orbit codebase [44], one of
the first publicly available codebases that run Reinforcement
Learning and Robot Learning algorithms on Isaac Sim.
Regarding the simulation parameters of the environments,
as mentioned in the text, we set default values in our GUI
and these are the same that are used across the environments.
In more detail, we use convex decomposition with 64 hull
vertices and 32 convex hulls as the collision mesh for all
objects. These values could vary in some environments, but
we have found they are in general a good default value. There
is one exception, the dish on the rack task, where the rack
needs to be simulated very precisely, in that case, we used
SDF mesh decomposition with 256 resolution which returns
high-fidelity collision meshes. Note that all these options can
be changed from our GUI. Regarding the physics parameters,
we set the dynamic and static frictions of the objects to be
0.5, the joint frictions to be 0.1, and the mass of the objects
to be 0.41kg. Note that in many of the tasks, we also leverage
setting fixed joints on the objects, to make sure these won’t
move, for example, on the shelf or kitchen.
IX. I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A. Network architectures
1) State-based policy: As described in Section III-C2, we
fine-tune a state-based policy with privileged information in
the simulator. This policy is a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) with two layers of size 256 each. This takes as input the
privileged state from the simulator and outputs a Categorical
distribution of size 14 encoding the probabilities for sampling
each discrete end-effector action. For our PPO with BC loss
implementation, we build on top of the Stable Baselines 3
repository [53]. The network for the value function shares the
first layer with the actor. See Table VI for more details.
2) Point cloud policy: For both the inverse distillation procedure (Section III-C1) and the last teacher-student distillation
steps (Section III-D) we train a policy that takes as input
the point cloud observation together with the state of the
robot (end-effector pose and state) and outputs a Categorical
distribution of size 14 encoding the probabilities for each
action. The network architecture consists of an encoder of the
point clouds that maps to an embedding of size 128. Then this
embedding is concatenated to the state of the robot (size 9) and
is passed through an MLP of size 256,256. Regarding the point
cloud encoder, we use the same volumetric 3D point cloud
encoder proposed in Convolutional Occupancy Networks [50],
consisting of a local point net followed by a 3D U-Net which
outputs a dense voxel grid of features. These features are then
pooled with both a max pooling layer and an average pooling
layer and the resulting two vectors are concatenated to obtain
the final point cloud encoding of size 128.

move the mug
back down

move the robot around

close back the cabinet
perturbe the book
pose after pick

move the mug
back down

close back the drawer
Fig. 10.
Task

Overview of the disturbances that RialTo is robust to in the different tasks that we evaluated it on.
USD Name

Episode
length

Parameters

Randomized

Position

Position

Orientation

Orientation

Object Ids

Min (x,y,z)

Max (x,y,z)

Min (z-axis)

Max (z-axis)

[0.3,-0.2,0.2]
[-0.4,0.035,0]
[[-0.3,0,0],
[-0.1,0.25,0]]
[[-0.25,0.12,0],
[-0.15,0.05,0]]
[-0.5,0.1,0.1]
[-0.26,-0.07,0.05]
[[[-0.2, -0.3,
-0.2], [-0.2,0.12,0]]]
[[[-0.25, -0.1,
-0.1],
[-0.1,0.05,0],
[-0.2,0,0]]]

[0.7,0.1,0.2]

[-0.1]

[0.1]

[0,0.25,0]

[-0.52,0]

[0.52,0]

Kitchen toaster

kitchentoaster3.usd

130

[267]

Plate on rack

dishinrackv3.usd

150

Mug on shelf

mugandshelf2.usd

150

[278,
[270,287]]
[267,263]

Book on shelf

booknshelve.usd

130

[277,
[268,272]]

Open cabinet

cabinet.usd

90

[268]

Open drawer

drawerbiggerhandle.usd

80

[268]

Cup in trash

cupntrash.usd

90

[263, 266]

Plate on rack from kitchen

dishsinklab.usd

110

[[263, 278,
270]]

[[0.25,0.3,0.07], [-0.52,-0.54]
[0.4,0.4,0]]
[[0.15,0.28,0],
[-0.52,0]
[0.15,0.15,0]]

[0.52, 0.54]
[0.52,0]

[0,0.3,-0.1]

[-0.52]

[0.52]

[0.16,0.27,0]

-0.5

0.5

[[[0.2, 0.1,
0.2],
[0.2,0.2,0]]]
[[[0.1, 0.2,
0.1],
[0.1,0.15,0],
[0,0,0]]]

[0,0]

[0,0]

[0,-0.3,0]

[0,0.3,0]

TABLE IV
S PECIFIC PARAMETERS FOR EACH ONE OF THE TASKS .

B. Teacher-student distillation
Given the state-based policy πsim (a|s) learned in the sim∗
ulator, we wish to distill it into a policy πsim
(a|o) that takes
the point cloud observation and outputs the action. We take
the standard teacher-student distillation approach [32, 12]. The
first step consists of doing imitation learning on a set of
trajectories given by the expert policy πsim (a|s) rollout. This
set of trajectories needs to be carefully designed to build an
implicit curriculum so that we can learn the student policy
successfully. When designing this dataset of trajectories, we

mix 15000 trajectories rendering full point clouds (where all
faces of the objects are visible, which is obtained through
directly sampling points from the mesh, as proposed in [12]),
5000 trajectories rendered from a camera viewpoint that is
approximately the same position as the camera in the real
world, a set of 2000 trajectories also generated from the same
camera viewpoint in sim but adding distractor objects (see
Figure 12), finally, we mix the 15 real-world trajectories. The
four different splits in the dataset are sampled equally, with
1/4 probability each.

Task
Parameters

Position (x,y,z)
Camera

Rotation (quat)
Camera

Crop Min
Camera

Crop Max
Camera

Size
Image

Kitchen toaster
Plate on rack
Mug on shelf
Book on shelf
Open cabinet
Open drawer
Cup in trash
Plate on rack from kitchen

[0.0, -0.37, 0.68]
[0.95,-0.4,0.68]
[0.95,-0.4,0.68]
[0.95,-0.4,0.68]
[0.95,-0.4,0.68]
[0.95,-0.4,0.68]
[0.0, -0.37, 0.68]
[0.0, -0.37, 0.68]

[0.82,0.34,-0.20, -0.41]
[0.78,0.36, 0.21, 0.46]
[0.78,0.36, 0.21, 0.46]
[0.78,0.36, 0.21, 0.46]
[0.78,0.36, 0.21, 0.46]
[0.78,0.36, 0.21, 0.46]
[0.82,0.34,-0.20, -0.41]
[0.82,0.34,-0.20, -0.41]

[-0.8,-0.8,-0.8]
[-0.3,-0.6,0.02]
[-0.3,-0.6,0.02]
[-0.3,-0.6,0.02]
[-0.3,-0.6,0.02]
[-0.3,-0.6,0.02]
[-1,-1,-1]
[-0.8,-0.8,-0.8]

[0.8,0.8,0.8]
[0.9,0.6,1]
[0.9,0.6,1]
[0.9,0.6,1]
[0.9,0.6,1]
[0.9,0.6,1]
[1,1,1]
[0.8,0.8,0.8]

(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)
(640,480)

TABLE V
C AMERA PARAMETERS FOR EACH TASK .

MLP layers

PPO n steps

PPO batch size

PPO BC batch size

PPO BC weight

Gradient Clipping

256,256

episode length

31257

32

0.1

5

TABLE VI
S TATE - BASED POLICY TRAINING PARAMETERS . T HE REST OF THE PARAMETERS ARE THE DEFAULT AS DESCRIBED IN S TABLE BASELINES 3[53].

Simulated Scenes

Mug on shelf

Kitchen - toaster

Dish track

Fig. 12. Distractor objects used to get a robust policy to visual distractors
in the teacher-student distillation step III-D.

Cabinet

Book on shelf

Drawer

Fig. 11. Overview of the scenes generated using our GUI and used for
evaluating RialTo.

After this first distillation step, we perform a step of DAgger
∗
[57], where we roll out the policy πsim
(a|o) and relabel the
actions with πsim (a|s). In this second and last step, we mix
the DAgger dataset with the trajectories with distractors in sim
and the real-world trajectories and sample trajectories. Again
each dataset is sampled equally with 1/3 probability each.
Finally, the details for generating and randomizing the point
clouds are available in Table VII and were largely inspired
by [12]. The parameters for training the point cloud-based
network are available in VIII.
C. Simulated Assets Baseline Details
To implement the baseline with multiple simulation assets
we had to incorporate two modifications for enabling the
multi-task policy learning: 1) at each episode we select a
drawer randomly from the set of drawers 2) we expand the
observation space of the state-based policy to include the index
of the drawer selected to open.

D. Imitation Learning Baseline
For the imitation learning baseline, we collect 15 (unless
otherwise specified) real-world demonstrations using a keyboard interface. We preprocess the point clouds in the same
manner as for the teacher-student distillation training (see
Section IX-B. We complete the point cloud sampling points
from the arm mesh leveraging the joints from the real robot.
We also add the same randomization: jitter, dropout, and
translation.
1) Imitation learning with new assets: We implemented an
additional baseline where we added point clouds sampled from
different object meshes (see Figure 12) into the real-world
point cloud to make the policy more robust to distractors.
However, no improvement in the robustness of this baseline
was found as seen in Figure IX. We hypothesize that this is
the case because the added meshes into the point cloud do
not bring any occlusions which is one of the main challenges
when adding distractors in point clouds.
X. H ARDWARE SETUP
Our experiments are run on two different Panda Franka
arms. One is, the Panda Franka arm 2, which is mounted
on a fixed table, we run the book on the shelf, mug on the
shelf, dish on the rack, open the cabinet, and open the drawer
there. Then we also ran part of our experiments, on a Panda

Total pcd
points
6000

Sample Arm
Points (#)

Dropout
ratio

Jitter
ratio

Jitter
noise

Sample Object
Meshes Points

Pcd
Normalization

Pcd
Scale

Grid
Size

3000

[0.1,0.3]

0.3

N (0, 0.01)

1000

[0,0,0]
(toaster)
[0.35,0,0.4]
(others)

0.625 (toaster)
1 (others)

32x32x32

TABLE VII
P OINT CLOUD GENERATION AND RANDOMIZATION PARAMETERS .

MLP layers
256,256

lr

Optimizer

Batch Size

Nb full pcd traj

Nb simulated pcd
traj

Nb simulated pcd
traj (distractors)

Nb real traj

0.0003

AdamW

32-64

15000

5000

1000

15

TABLE VIII
P OINT CLOUD TEACHER - STUDENT DISTILLATION PARAMETERS .

Distractors

Disturbances

40 ± 15%
50 ± 17%

50 ± 17%
20 ± 13%

10 ± 9%
10 ± 9%

IL
IL with distractors

TABLE IX
C OMPARISON OF THE PLAIN IMITATION LEARNING BASELINE (IL)
AGAINST ADDING NEW DISTRACTORS (IL WITH DISTRACTORS ) ON THE
TASK OF OPENING THE DRAWER . N O IMPROVEMENT IS OBSERVED .
Realsense
D435

Realsense
D455

Franka Research 3

used for compact state policies. Rendering point clouds in
simulation is also approximately 10x slower than running the
pipeline without any rendering. When adding these factors
up, RL from vision becomes much slower and practically
infeasible given our setup with sparse rewards.
1

96%

0.8

Success Ratio

Pose
randomization

RL from states

0.6

Franka Emika Panda

RL from vision

0.4
0.2

Mobile table

Fixed table

Fig. 13. Overview of the hardware setup used for evaluating RialTo. left:
used for the kitchen toaster task, right: used for the book on the shelf, mug
on the shelf, dish on the rack, open cabinet, and open drawer tasks.

Franka arm 3, mounted on a mobile table, more concretely, the
open toaster in the kitchen was the task run on this arm. The
communication between the higher and lower level controller
of the arm is done through Polymetis [36].
We mount one calibrated camera per setup to extract the
depth maps that will be passed to our vision policies. More
concretely we use the Intel depth Realsense camera D455 on
the first setup and the Intel depth Realsense camera D435 on
the second setup. See Figure 13 for more details on the robot
setup.
XI. F URTHER A NALYSIS
A. RL from vision
Part of the inefficiency of running RL from vision comes
from the increased memory required to compute the policy
loss for vision-based RL – on the same GPU, the batch size
for vision-based policies is 100x smaller than the batch size

0

1%
0

5

10 12

15

20

Wall Time (hours)

25

30

35

Fig. 14. Wall clock time comparison of running PPO from vision against
from compact states.

B. RL from Scratch
In Figure 15, we qualitatively observe the phenomena that
we mention in III-C2, where the policy trained from scratch,
without demos, exploits the model’s inaccuracies. In this
specific case, we observe that the policy leverages the slightly
incorrectly placed joint to open the microwave in an unnatural
way that wouldn’t transfer to the real world.
C. RL from different amounts of real-world data
In this section, we analyze further how many real-world
demonstrations are needed to successfully fine-tune policies
with RL in simulation. We start with 0,5,10,15 real-world
demonstrations and inverse-distill the policy by collecting 15
sim trajectories from this real-world trained policy. We observe
in table X that for the task of placing a book on the shelf, there
is a step function where the PPO has a 0% success rate until
15 demos are used. The reason is that with less than 15 demos

Imitation learning
RialTo
RialTo multitask
time

Fig. 15. Visualization of a rollout of the final policy learned with RL without
demos and achieving a 62% accuracy on opening the toaster in simulation. We
observe the resulting policy that learns without demos exploits the model’s
inaccuracies, thereafter it will not transfer to the real world.

RL fine-tuning from 0 real demos
RL fine-tuning from 5 real demos
RL fine-tuning from 10 real demos
RL fine-tuning from 15 real demos

Book on
shelf

Open
drawer

0 ± 0%
0 ± 0%
0 ± 0%
90 ± 2%

0 ± 0%
89 ± 1%
96 ± 1%
96 ± 1%

TABLE X
C OMPARISON OF TRAINING RL FROM DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF
REAL - WORLD DEMOS .

the real-world policy does not transfer to the simulation hence
no sim demos can be collected during the inverse distillation
procedure. Thereafter the RL fine-tuned policy starts from
scratch when using < 15 real-world demos. On the other side,
for the easier task of opening a drawer, we observe this step
function earlier, where at > 5 demos we can do RL fine-tuning
from demos and obtain successful policies.
D. Mixing RialTo with synthetic data
We run RialTo combining the data from the synthetic assets
experiment (see Figure 7) together with the simulated target
environment data and study whether we get any performance
gain by combining these two sources of data on the task of
opening the drawer. We observe in Table XI that there is no
clear improvement when combining the simulated assets with
the target asset. One reason could be that more synthetic data
is needed to observe an increase in performance. The other
hypothesis is that learning only on the target environment
(RialTo) is enough and the 10% left to reach 100% success
rate in the real world comes from the sim-to-real gap.
E. RialTo Multi-Task
We propose a multi-task version of RialTo. We train multitask RialTo on the tasks of opening a drawer, putting a mug on
the shelf, cup in the trash, and dish on the rack environments.
The proposed multi-task RialTo procedure is the following:

RialTo
RialTo + synthetic assets

Pose
randomization

Distractors

90 ± 9%
90 ± 9%

90 ± 9%
80 ± 13%

TABLE XI
C OMPARISON OF USING R IALT O WITH ADDED SYNTHETIC ASSETS
AGAINST STANDARD R IALT O ON THE TASK OF OPENING THE DRAWER IN
THE REAL WORLD . N O IMPROVEMENT IS OBSERVED .

Open
drawer

Mug
on shelf

40 ± 17%
90 ± 9%
90 ± 9%

10 ± 9%
100 ± 0%
80 ± 15%

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF TRAINING R IALT O ON MULTIPLE TASKS AGAINST
SINGLE - TASK R IALT O . N O IMPROVEMENT IS OBSERVED .

1) Train separate state-based single-task policies per task
2) Collect trajectories from each one of the tasks with the
state-based policies
3) Distill these trajectories into a single multi-task policy
conditioned with the task-id
4) Run multiple iterations of DAgger on each task sequentially to obtain a final multi-task policy
We evaluate this policy in the real world on two of the
tasks and observe in Table XII that in opening the drawer, the
performance of multi-task RialTo matches single-task (90%
success). However, the performance slightly decreases on the
mug on the shelf task (from 100% on single-task to 80% on
multi-task). Nevertheless, the performance is still above the
imitation learning baseline (40% for the drawer and 10% for
the mug on the shelf). We did not tune any hyperparameters,
and we kept the same network size that we used for the RialTo
experiments. We should be able to bring the performance of
the mug on the shelf task to match the single-task policy with
some hyperparameter tuning.
We showed that RialTo can be easily adapted to train multitask policies. We hypothesize that we need to train in more
environments to obtain multi-task generalization.
F. Sim-to-real gap
We analyze and propose an explanation for the observed
sim-to-real gap in Table XIII, where we show the performance
of the final point cloud-based policy in both simulation and
the real world. We observe that in general, the sim-to-real gap
does not seem to be present. In some cases such as for the mug
on shelf task, we observe that the performance in simulation is
worse than the performance in the real world. The main reason
for this disparity is that we want to make the simulation harder
than the real-world environment to make sure that we will be
able to recover a good robust policy in the real world.
XII. GUI FOR R EAL - TO -S IM T RANSFER OF S CENES
In the main text and video, we provide an overview of
the features and capabilities of our GUI. Additional valuable
features include the ability to populate the scene with assets
from object datasets such as Objaverse [17]. This allows for
randomizing surrounding clutter and supporting policy training
that generalizes to distractor objects (see Section V-A).
1) 3D reconstruction software used: We mainly used 3
different methods/apps for obtaining the 3D meshes from
videos:
1) Polycam [52] is used to scan larger scenes, such as
the kitchen. Polycam makes effective use of the built-in

Performance in simulation
Performance in the real world

Kitchen
toaster

Book on
shelf

Plate on
rack

Mug on
shelf

Open
drawer

Open
cabinet

90 ± 4%
90 ± 9%

84 ± 5%
90 ± 9%

80 ± 6%
90 ± 9%

72 ± 6%
100 ± 0%

95 ± 3%
90 ± 9%

92 ± 4%
85 ± 8%

TABLE XIII
C OMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE IN SIMULATION ( TOP ) AND THE REAL WORLD ( BOTTOM ).

iPhone depth sensor which helps extract realistic surface
geometry for large uniform flat surface (e.g., a kitchen
counter). However, we find it struggles with fine-grained
details. Polycam outputs a GLTF file, which we convert
directly to a USD for loading into Isaac Sim using an
online conversion tool.
2) AR Code [15] is used to extract high-quality meshes for
single objects that can be viewed by images covering
the full 360 degrees surrounding the object (e.g., cabinet,
mug, microwave, drawer). While AR Code leads to more
accurate geometry than Polycam for singulated objects,
we still find it struggles on objects with very thin parts.
AR Code directly outputs a USD file that can be loaded
into Isaac Sim.
3) NeRFStudio [64] is used to capture objects that require significantly more detail to represent the geometry
faithfully. For example, AR Code failed to capture the
thin metal structures on the dish rack, whereas NeRFs
are capable of representing these challenging geometric
parts. We use the default “nerfacto” model and training
parameters. This method trains a relatively small model
on a single desktop GPU in about 10 minutes. After
training converges, we use the NeRFStudio tools for
extracting a 3D point cloud and obtaining a textured mesh
with Poisson Surface Reconstruction [30]. This outputs an
OBJ file, which we convert into a USD by first converting
from OBJ to GLTF, and then converting from GLTF into
USD (with both file conversions performed with an online
conversion tool).
XIII. GUI U SER STUDY
To test the functionality and versatility of the real-to-sim
generation pipeline, we ran a user study over six people, where
each participant was tasked with creating an articulated scene
using the provided GUI. Every individual was given the same
set of instructions that would guide them through the process
of constructing a usable and accurate scene. At the start of each
trial, the participant was instructed to download Polycam [52],
which uses a mobile device’s LiDAR to generate 3D models.
The user then selected a location and captured their scene by
taking a sequence of images. The time required to complete
this step was recorded as “Scan Time.” Once the images were
captured, Polycam needed to process the pictures to transform
the scene into a three-dimensional mesh. Once the mesh had
been generated, the participant was then instructed to upload
the articulated USD to a computer and convert this file into the
GLB format (required by our GUI). Finally, the user uploaded

User Study Scanned Scenes

Phone cabin

Printer room

Table desk

Bathroom 1

Kitchen

Bathroom 2

Added Joint

Added Object

Cut Object

Fig. 16. Overview of the scenes assembled by the Users during the user
study, see Section VI.

the GLB file into the provided GUI, and the time required to
complete these steps was recorded as “Scan Processing and
Uploading Time.” Because the uploaded mesh was created
using one scan, all objects in the scene are connected, and the
user is unable to move a single item without shifting the entire
background. Thus, in order to create a more realistic scene, the
participant was asked to use the GUI to cut an object out of
the scene, allowing this item to be manipulated independently
of the background. The time it took for the user to cut this
object from the original mesh was regarded as “Cut Time.”
In an attempt to further the realistic nature of this scene, the
participant was then instructed to specify joint parameters and
create a fixed joint that would allow an object in the scene
to rotate about a specific point. For instance, a fixed joint at
a door would allow the door to rotate about its hinge and
generate an accurate simulation of door movement. The time
required to create a fixed joint in the scene was recorded as
“Joint Time.” Lastly, to demonstrate the full capabilities of
the GUI, the participant was asked to add another object to
their current scene. They were instructed to download another
3D scanning application, AR Code [15], which was used to

User 1
User 2
User 3
User 4
User 5
User 6

Scan

Process +
Upload 1st Scan
(idle)

Cut

Joint

2nd Scan

Process +
Upload 2nd
Scan (idle)

Total time

Total active
time

2:25
6:30
3:52
2:34
1:32
2:30

5:41
12:57
5:52
2:06
2:33
3:52

4:15
3:32
4:35
2:48
4:43
2:08

4:56
3:51
4:14
1:41
1:28
1:17

8:10
2:37
3:26
5:14
4:34
4:59

10:45
4:19
4:15
4:33
3:50
2:26

36:12
33:46
26:14
19:06
18:40
17:12

19:46
16:30
16:07
12:27
12:17
10:54

TABLE XIV
D ETAILED TIME SPENT BY EACH USER IN THE USER STUDY, SEE S ECTION VI.

create the three-dimensional mesh of the additional object.
The time required to generate this mesh was recorded as
“Scan Time (2).” Then the participant again converted their
mesh to GLB format and uploaded this file to the same GUI.
Once uploaded, the object was placed in a realistic position
within the scene, and the time elapsed during this step was
added to the “Scan Processing and Uploading Time” category.
Through this user study, we found that it took an average
of 14.67 active minutes (excluding the “Scan Processing and
Uploading Time” category) to create a scene that included one
cut object, one fixed joint, and one additional object. However,
it is important to note that User 6 had previous experience
using this GUI, while all other users had no experience. Thus,
if we disregard the results of User 6, we find the average time
to create a scene to be 15.42 active minutes, which is not
a significant difference. As a result, the real-to-sim transfer
using the provided GUI seems to be an intuitive process that
is neither time nor labor-intensive.
User 1 took the longest time to complete this series of
tasks mostly due to their extensive upload period. Because
User 1 scanned their environment for a lengthy period, their
articulated USD file was larger than all other users. As a result,
it took longer for them to upload their file to a computer and
convert this file to GLB format. The abnormal size of User 1’s
file coupled with their difficulty operating the file conversion
website led to a lengthy Scan Processing and Upload Time,
which led to the slowest overall performance.
User 2 was the only user who was sent instructions digitally
and completed the tasks remotely. An individual experienced
with the real-to-sim pipeline was present for all other trials.
Thus, this may have contributed to User 2’s longer completion
time, as their questions had to be answered remotely. However,
User 2 did not have trouble with any particular section of the
pipeline but rather took a longer time to complete each section.
User 3’s experience with the real-to-sim pipeline went
smoothly, as there were no obvious difficulties while scanning,
uploading, or using the GUI. They followed the instructions
quickly and precisely, resulting in a better completion time
than Users 1 and 2.
Users 4 and 5 completed all tasks in the pipeline more
quickly than User 3 because the background they chose was
smaller with fewer details. Thus, they were able to scan their
scenes faster, generating a smaller file that was able to be

processed, uploaded, and converted more quickly. However,
their speed did reduce the quality of their backgrounds, since
the details in both scans are not as precise as the others. Thus,
it seems User 3 completed the tasks quickly with the most
accurate scan.
User 6 had previous experience with the real-to-sim
pipeline, so they were able to use this expertise to quickly
complete the tasks. The only abnormality with User 6’s trial
was their longer Scan Time for object 2. They had trouble
with the “AR code” app during this trial, resulting in a longer
Scan Time (2).
A. Scaling laws of the RialTo GUI
total active time = tscan scene
+tscan object · Nobjects
+tcut object · Ncut objects

(3)

+tadd joint · Njoints
We derive a relation to express the total active time needed
to create a scene with respect to the number of joints and
objects there are in the scene. The total active time to create
a scene increases linearly in complexity with the number of
objects and joints present in the scene, as seen in Relation 3.
We define Nobjects as the number of scanned objects that we
want to add, Ncut objects as the number of objects that we want
to extract from the scanned scene, Njoints as the number of
joints the scene has. Taking the average times from our user
study (see Table XIV) we find tscan object = 4 : 50, tscan scene =
3 : 14, tadd joint = 2 : 54, tcut object = 3 : 40. Note that these
values are on the conservative side since only one user was an
expert, and with increased expertise, these coefficients become
smaller.

XIV. C OMPUTE RESOURCES
We run all of our experiments on an NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 2080 or an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090. The first step
of learning a vision policy from the real-world demos and
collecting a set of 15 demonstrations in simulation takes an
average of 7 hours. The next step of RL fine-tuning from
demonstrations takes on average 20 hours to converge. Finally,

the teacher-student distillation step takes 24 hours between
collecting the trajectories, distilling into the vision policy, and
running the last step of DAgger. This adds up to a total of 2
days and 3 hours on average to train a policy for a given task.

