Segment Any 3D Gaussians
Jiazhong Cen1 , Jiemin Fang2 , Chen Yang1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Xiaopeng Zhang2 , Wei Shen1 * , Qi Tian2

arXiv:2312.00860v3 [cs.CV] 5 Feb 2025

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{jiazhongcen, ycyangchen, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jaminfong, 198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
This paper presents SAGA (Segment Any 3D GAussians), a
highly efficient 3D promptable segmentation method based
on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS). Given 2D visual prompts
as input, SAGA can segment the corresponding 3D target represented by 3D Gaussians within 4 ms. This is achieved by attaching an scale-gated affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian to
endow it a new property towards multi-granularity segmentation. Specifically, a scale-aware contrastive training strategy
is proposed for the scale-gated affinity feature learning. It 1)
distills the segmentation capability of the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) from 2D masks into the affinity features and
2) employs a soft scale-gate mechanism to deal with multigranularity ambiguity in 3D segmentation through adjusting
the magnitude of each feature channel according to a specified 3D physical scale. Evaluations demonstrate that SAGA
achieves real-time multi-granularity segmentation with quality comparable to state-of-the-art methods. As one of the first
methods addressing promptable segmentation in 3D-GS, the
simplicity and effectiveness of SAGA pave the way for future
advancements in this field.

Code — https://github.com/Jumpat/SegAnyGAussians

1

Introduction

Promptable segmentation has attracted increasing attention
and has seen significant advancements, particularly with the
development of 2D segmentation foundation models such as
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al. 2023).
However, 3D promptable segmentation remains relatively
unexplored due to the scarcity of 3D data and the high cost of
annotation. To address these challenges, many studies (Cen
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Ying et al. 2024; Kim et al.
2024; Fan et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2024b) have proposed to
extend SAM’s 2D segmentation capabilities to 3D using radiance fields, achieving notable success.
In this paper, we focus on promptable segmentation in 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023), which represents a significant milestone in radiance fields research due
to its superior rendering quality and efficiency compared to
its predecessors. We highlight that, in contrast to previous
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

radiance fields, the explicit 3D Gaussian structure is an ideal
carrier for 3D segmentation, as segmentation capabilities
can be integrated into 3D-GS as an intrinsic attribute, without necessitating an additional bulky segmentation module.
Accordingly, we propose SAGA (Segment Any 3D
GAussians), a 3D promptable segmentation method that integrates the segmentation capabilities of SAM into 3D-GS
seamlessly. SAGA takes 2D visual prompts as input and outputs the corresponding 3D target represented by 3D Gaussians. To achieve this purpose, two primary challenges are
faced. First, SAGA should figure out an efficient way to endow each 3D Gaussian with the ability of 3D segmentation,
so that the high efficiency of 3D-GS can be preserved. Second, as a robust promptable segmentation method, SAGA
must effectively address multi-granularity ambiguity, where
a single 3D Gaussian may belong to different parts or objects
at varying levels of granularity.
To address the two challenges, SAGA respectively introduces two solutions. First, SAGA attaches an affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian in a scene to endow it with a
new property towards segmentation. The similarity between
two affinity features indicates whether the corresponding 3D
Gaussians belong to the same 3D target. Second, inspired by
GARField (Kim et al. 2024), SAGA employs a soft scalegate mechanism to handle multi-granularity ambiguity. Depending on a specified 3D physical scale, the scale gate adjusts the magnitude of each feature channel. This mechanism
maps the Gaussian affinity features into different sub-spaces
for various scales, thereby preserving the multi-granularity
information and meanwhile mitigating the distraction in feature learning brought by multi-granularity ambiguity. To realize the two solutions, SAGA proposes a scale-aware contrastive training strategy, which distills the segmentation capability of SAM from 2D masks into scale-gated affinity
features. This strategy determines the correlations between
a pair of pixels within an image based on 3D scales. These
correlations are then used to supervise the rendered affinity
features through a correspondence distillation loss. The correlation information is transmitted to the Gaussian affinity
features via backpropagation facilitated by the differentiable
rasterization algorithm. After training, SAGA achieves realtime multi-granularity segmentation precisely.

Figure 1: SAGA performs promptable multi-granularity segmentation within milliseconds. Prompts are marked by points.

2

Related Work

2D Promptable Segmentation The task of 2D promptable segmentation is proposed by Kirillov et al. (2023),
which aims to return segmentation masks given input
prompts that specify the segmentation target in an image.
To address this problem, they introduce the Segment Anything Model (SAM), a groundbreaking segmentation foundation model. A similar model to SAM is SEEM (Zou et al.
2023), which also achieves competitive performance. Prior
to these models, the most closely related task to promptable
2D segmentation is interactive image segmentation (Boykov
and Jolly 2001; Grady 2006; Gulshan et al. 2010; Rother,
Kolmogorov, and Blake 2004; Chen et al. 2022b; Sofiiuk,
Petrov, and Konushin 2022; Liu et al. 2023b). Inspired by
the success of SAM, many studies (Yang et al. 2023; Xu
et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Yin et al. 2024) proposed to use
SAM for 3D segmentation. Different from them, we focus
on lifting the ability of SAM to 3D via 3D-GS.
3D Segmentation in Radiance Fields With the success
of radiance fields (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Sun, Sun, and
Chen 2022; Chen et al. 2022a; Barron et al. 2022; Müller
et al. 2022; Hedman et al. 2024; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022;
Wizadwongsa et al. 2021; Lindell, Martel, and Wetzstein
2021; Fang et al. 2022), numerous studies have explored
3D segmentation within them. Zhi et al. (2021) proposed
Semantic-NeRF, demonstrating the potential of Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) in semantic propagation and refinement. NVOS (Ren et al. 2022) introduced an interactive
approach to select 3D objects from NeRF by training a
lightweight MLP using custom-designed 3D features. By using 2D self-supervised models, approaches like N3F (Tschernezki et al. 2022), DFF (Kobayashi, Matsumoto, and Sitzmann 2022), and ISRF (Goel et al. 2023) aim to elevate 2D

visual features to 3D by training additional feature fields
that can output 2D feature maps, imitating the original
2D features from different views. NeRF-SOS (Fan et al.
2023) and ContrastiveLift (Bhalgat et al. 2023) distill the
2D feature similarities into 3D features. There are also some
other instance segmentation and semantic segmentation approaches (Stelzner, Kersting, and Kosiorek 2021; Niemeyer
and Geiger 2021; Yu, Guibas, and Wu 2022; Liu et al. 2022,
2023c; Bing, Chen, and Yang 2023; Fu et al. 2022; Vora et al.
2022; Siddiqui et al. 2023) for radiance fields. Combined
with CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), some approaches (Kerr
et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a; Bhalgat et al. 2024; Qin et al.
2024) proposed to conduct open-vocabulary 3D segmentation in radiance fields. With the popularity of SAM, a stream
of studies (Kim et al. 2024; Ying et al. 2024; Ye et al.
2024; Cen et al. 2023; Lyu et al. 2024) proposed lifting
the segmentation ability of SAM to 3D with radiance fields.
SA3D (Cen et al. 2023) adopts an iterative pipeline to refine
the 3D mask grids with SAM. GaussianGrouping (Ye et al.
2024) uses video tracking technology to align the inconsistent 2D masks extracted by SAM across different views and
assigns labels to 3D Gaussians in a 3D-GS model with the
aligned masks. OmniSeg3D (Ying et al. 2024) employs a hierarchical contrastive learning method to automatically learn
segmentation from multi-view 2D masks extracted by SAM.
The approach most closely related to SAGA is
GARField (Kim et al. 2024), which addresses multigranularity ambiguity in 3D segmentation using 3D physical scale, inspiring SAGA’s scale gate mechanism. However,
GARField’s reliance on implicit feature fields for outputting
3D features requires repeated queries for segmentation at
different scales, reducing efficiency. In contrast, the scalegate mechanism of SAGA enhances efficiency by integrating directly with 3D-GS without additional computation.

3

Method

In this section, we first give a brief review of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) and the scaleconditioned 3D features (Kerr et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2024).
Then we introduce the overall pipeline of SAGA, followed
by explanation of the scale-gated Gaussian affinity features
and the scale-aware contrastive learning.

3.1

Preliminary

3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) Given a training dataset
I of multi-view 2D images with camera poses, 3D-GS
learns a set of 3D colored Gaussians G = {g1 , g2 , ..., gN },
where N denotes the number of 3D Gaussians in the scene.
The mean of a Gaussian represents its position and the covariance indicates its scale. Accordingly, 3D-GS proposes
a novel differentiable rasterization technology for efficient
training and rendering. Given a specific camera pose, 3DGS projects the 3D Gaussians to 2D and computes the color
C(p) of a pixel p by blending a set of ordered Gaussians
Gp overlapping the pixel. Let gip denote the i-th Gaussian in
Gp , this process is formulated as:
C(p) =

|Gp |
X
i=1

cgip αgip

i−1
Y

(1 − αgjp ),

(1)

j=1

where cgip is the color of gip and αgip is given by evaluat-

ing the corresponding 2D Gaussian with covariance Σ multiplied with a learned per-Gaussian opacity.

Scale-Conditioned 3D Feature LERF (Kerr et al. 2023)
first proposes the concept of a scale-conditioned feature field
for learning from global image embeddings obtained from
CLIP. GARField (Kim et al. 2024) then introduces it into
the area of radiance field segmentation to tackle the multigranularity ambiguity. To compute the 3D mask scale sM of
a 2D mask M, GARField projects M into 3D space with
the camera intrinsic parameters and depth information predicted by a pre-trained radiance field. Let P denote the obtained point cloud, X (P), Y(P), Z(P) denote the set of 3D
coordinate components of P, the mask scale sM is:
p
sM = 2 std(X (P))2 + std(Y(P))2 + std(Z(P))2 ,
(2)
where std(·) denotes the standard variation of a set of
scalars. Since these scales are computed in 3D space, they
are generally consistent across different views. SAGA uses
the 3D scales for multi-granularity segmentation but realizes
it in a more efficient way.

3.2

Overall Pipeline

The main components of SAGA are shown in Figure 2.
Given a pre-trained 3D-GS model G, SAGA attaches a Gaussian affinity feature fg ∈ RD for each 3D Gaussian g
in G. D denotes the feature dimension. To handle the inherent multi-granularity ambiguity of 3D promptable segmentation, SAGA employs a soft scale gate mechanism to
project these features into different scale-gated feature subspaces for various scales s.

To train the affinity features, SAGA extracts a set of multigranularity masks MI = {MiI ∈ {0, 1}HW |i = 1, ..., NI }
for each image I in the training set I with SAM. H, W denotes the height and width of I respectively. NI is the number of extracted masks. For each mask MiI , its 3D physical
scale sMiI is calculated using the depth predicted by G with
the camera pose, as shown in Equation (2). Subsequently,
SAGA employs a scale-aware contrastive learning strategy
(Section 3.4) to distill the multi-granularity segmentation
ability embedded in multi-view 2D masks into the scalegated affinity features. After training, at given scales, the
affinity feature similarities between two Gaussians indicate
whether they belong to the same 3D target.
During inference (Section 3.5), given a specific viewpoint, SAGA converts 2D visual prompts (points with
scales) into corresponding 3D scale-gated query features to
segment the 3D target by evaluating feature similarities with
3D affinity features. Additionally, with well-trained affinity
features, 3D scene decomposition is achievable through simple clustering. Moreover, by integrating with CLIP, SAGA
can perform open-vocabulary segmentation (see Section A.3
of the supplement) without requiring language fields.

3.3

Gaussian Affinity Feature

At the core of SAGA is the Gaussian affinity features F =
{fg | g ∈ G}, which are learned from the multi-view
2D masks extracted by SAM. To tackle the inherent multigranularity ambiguity in promptable segmentation, inspired
by GARfield (Kim et al. 2024), we introduce a scale-gate
mechanism to split the feature space into different subspaces for various 3D physical scales. Then, a 3D Gaussian can belong to different segmentation targets at different
granularities without conflict.
Scale-Gated Affinity Features Given a Gaussian affinity
feature fg and a specific scale s, SAGA adopts a scale gate
to adapt the magnitude of different feature channels accordingly. The scale gate is defined as a mapping S : [0, 1] →
[0, 1]D , which projects a scale scalar s ∈ [0, 1] to its corresponding soft gate vector S(s). To maximize segmentation
efficiency, the scale gate adopts a extremely streamlined design, which is a single linear layer followed by a sigmoid
function. At the scale of s the scale-gated affinity feature is:
fgs = S(s) ⊙ fg ,

(3)

where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. Thanks to the
simplicity of the scale-gate mechanism, the time overhead
caused by scale changing is negligible.
Since all Gaussian affinity features share a common scale
gate at scale s, during training, we can first render the affinity features to 2D and then apply the scale gate to the 2D
rendered features, i.e.,
F(p) =

|Gp |
X
i=1

fgip αgip

i−1
Y

(1 − αgjp ),

(4)

j=1

Fs (p) = S(s) ⊙ F(p).
(5)
During inference, the scale gate is directly applied to the 3D
Gaussian affinity features for conducting 3D segmentation.

Figure 2: The architecture of SAGA. Left: SAGA attaches a Gaussian affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian. The magnitude
of different affinity feature channels are adjusted by a soft scale gate to handle multi-granularity ambiguity. Right: SAGA
distills segmentation ability of SAM into affinity features attached to 3D Gaussians in the 3D-GS model through scale-aware
contrastive learning.
Local Feature Smoothing In practice, we find that there
are many noisy Gaussians in the 3D space that exhibit unexpectedly high feature similarities with the segmentation
target. This may occur for various reasons, such as insufficient training due to small weights in rasterization or incorrect geometry structure learned by 3D-GS. To tackle this
problem, we adopt the spatial locality prior of 3D Gaussians. During training, SAGA uses the smoothed affinity feature of a P
Gaussian g to replace its original feature fg , i.e.,
1
′
fg ← K
g′ ∈KNN(g) fg . KNN(g) denotes K-nearest neighbors of g. After training, the affinity feature for each 3D
Gaussian is saved as its smoothed feature.

3.4

Scale-Aware Contrastive Learning

As introduced in Section 3.3, each 3D Gaussian g is assigned with an affinity feature fg . To train these features, we
employ a scale-aware contrastive learning strategy to distill
the pixel-wise correlation information from 2D masks into
3D Gaussians via the differentiable rasterization.
Scale-Aware Pixel Identity Vector To conduct scaleaware contrastive learning, for an image I, we first convert
the automatically extracted 2D masks MI to scale-aware supervision signal. For this purpose, we assign a scale-aware
pixel identity vector V(s, p) ∈ {0, 1}NI to each pixel p in
I. The identity vectors reflect the 2D masks that a pixel belong to at specific scales. If two pixels p1 , p2 share at least
a same mask at a given scale (i.e., V(s, p1 ) · V(s, p2 ) > 0),
they should have similar features at scale s.
To obtain V(s, p), we first sort the mask set MI in descending order according to their mask scales and get an or(1)
(N )
dered mask list OI = (MI , ..., MI I ), where sM(1) >
I
... > sM(NI ) . Then, for a pixel p, when sM(i) < s, the i-th
I

I

(i)

entry of V(s, p) is set to MI (p). When sM(i) ≥ s, the i-th
I

(i)

entry of V(s, p) equals to 1 only if MI (p) = 1 and all
(j)
smaller masks in {MI | s ≤ sM(j) < sM(i) } equals to 0
I
I
at pixel p. Formally, we have:
(
Vi (s, p) =

(i)

MI (p) if sM(i) < s or C(p)
I

0

otherwise



(j)
C(p) ≜ ∀M ∈ {MI | s ≤ sM(j) < sM(i) }, M(p) = 0
I
I
(6)
This assignment of pixel identity vectors is based on the
fact that if a pixel belongs to a specific mask at a given scale,
it will continue to belong to that mask at larger scales.
Loss Function We adapt the correspondence distillation
loss (Hamilton et al. 2022) for training the scale-gated Gaussian affinity features. Concretely, for two pixels p1 , p2 at a
given scale s, their mask correspondence is given by:
Corrm (s, p1 , p2 ) = 1(V(s, p1 ) · V(s, p2 )),

(7)

where 1(·) is the indicator function, which is equal to 1
when the input greater than or equal to 0. The feature correspondence between two pixels is defined as the cosine similarity between their scale-gated features:
Corrf (s, p1 , p2 ) = ⟨Fs (p1 ), Fs (p2 )⟩.

(8)

The correspondence distillation loss Lcorr (p1 , p2 ) between
two pixels is given by1 :
Lcorr (s, p1 , p2 ) = (1 − 2 · Corrm (s, p1 , p2 ))
· max(Corrf (s, p1 , p2 ), 0)

(9)

1
The feature correspondence is clipped at 0 to stabilize training.
Please refer to Hamilton et al. (2022) for more details.

Feature Norm Regularization During training, the 2D
features are obtained by rendering with 3D affinity features.
This indicates a misalignment between 2D and 3D features.
As revealed in Equation (4), a 2D feature is a linear combination of multiple 3D features, each with distinct directions.
In such situations, SAGA may show good segmentation ability on the rendered feature map but perform poorly in 3D
space. This motivates us to introduce a feature norm regularization. Concretely, during rendering the 2D feature map,
the 3D features are first normalized as unit vectors, i.e.,
F(p) =

|Gp |
X

fgip

i=1

||fgip ||2

αgip

i−1
Y

(1 − αgjp ).

mAcc (%)

NVOS (Ren et al. 2022)
ISRF (Goel et al. 2023)
SA3D (Cen et al. 2023)
OmniSeg3D (Ying et al. 2024)

70.1
83.8
90.3
91.7

92.0
96.4
98.2
98.4

GauGroup (Ye et al. 2024)
SA3D-GS (Cen et al. 2024)
SAGA (ours)

85.6
92.2
92.6

97.3
98.5
98.6

(10)

j=1

Lnorm (p) = 1 − ||F(p)||2

(11)

With the feature norm regularization term, for an iteration
of training, the loss of SAGA is defined as:
X
X
L=
Lcorr (p1 , p2 ) +
Lnorm (p),
(p1 ,p2 )∈δ(I)×δ(I)

p∈δ(I)

(12)
where δ(I) denotes the set of pixels within the image I.
Additional Training Strategy During the training, an unavoidable issue is the data imbalance, reflected by: 1) Most
pixel pairs keep to be positive or negative regardless of scale
variations, making the learned feature insensitive to scales;
2) The majority of pixel pairs shows negative correspondence, resulting in feature collapse; 3) Large targets that occupy more pixels in images have more effect on the optimization, leading to bad performance of segmenting small
targets. We tackle this problem by resampling the pixelpairs and re-weighting the loss function for different samples. Please refer to Section A.1 of the appendix.

Inference

With well-trained Gaussian affinity features, SAGA can
conduct various segmentation tasks in the 3D space. For
promptable segmentation, SAGA takes 2D point prompts
at specific view and the scale as input. Then, SAGA segments the 3D target by matching scale-gated 3D Gaussian
affinity features with the 2D query features selected from
the rendered feature map according to prompt points. For
automatic scene decomposing, SAGA employs HDBSCAN
to cluster the affinity features directly in the 3D space2 . Additionally, we design a vote-based segmentation mechanism
to integrate SAGA with CLIP for conducting open vocabulary segmentation (see Section A.3 of the supplement).

4

mIoU (%)

Table 1: Results on NVOS dataset.

Accordingly, ||F(p)||2 ranges in [0, 1]. When 3D features
along a ray are perfectly aligned, ||F(p)||2 = 1. Thus, we
impose a regularization on the rendered feature norm:

3.5

Method

Experiments

In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SAGA
both quantitatively and qualitatively. For implementation details and experiment settings, please refer to Section A.2.
2
For efficiency, SAGA uniformly selects 1% of the Gaussians
from the 3D-GS model for clustering.

4.1

Datasets

For promptable segmentation experiments, we utilize two
datasets: NVOS (Ren et al. 2022) and SPIn-NeRF(Mirzaei
et al. 2023). The former is derived from the LLFF
dataset (Mildenhall et al. 2019) and the latter is a combination of subsets of data from established NeRF-related
datasets (Mildenhall et al. 2019, 2020; Lin et al. 2022;
Knapitsch et al. 2017; Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022). For
open-vocabulary segmentation experiments, we adopt the
3D-OVS dataset (Liu et al. 2023a). For qualitative analysis (Figure 3 and 4), we employ various datasets including LLFF (Mildenhall et al. 2019), MIP-360 (Barron
et al. 2022), Tanks&Temple (Knapitsch et al. 2017), and
Replica (Straub et al. 2019). These datasets encompass indoor and outdoor scenes, forward-facing and 360-degree
scenes, as well as synthetic and real scenes.

4.2

Quantitative Results

NVOS Dataset As shown in Table 1, SAGA outperforms
previous segmentation approaches for both 3D-GS and other
radiance fields, i.e., +0.4 mIoU over the previous SOTA
SA3D-GS and +0.9 mIoU over the OmniSeg3D.
SPIn-NeRF Dataset Results on the SPIn-NeRF dataset
can be found in Table 2. SA3D performs on par with the previous SOTA OmniSeg3D. The minor performance degradation is attributed to sub-optimal geometry learned by 3D-GS.
For example, 3D-GS models the reflection effects with numerous outlier Gaussians that are not aligned with the exact
geometry of the object. Excluding these Gaussians results
in empty holes in the segmentation mask for certain views,
while including them introduces noise in other views. Nevertheless, we believe the segmentation accuracy of SAGA
can meet most requirements.
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation As shown in
Table 3, SAGA demonstrates superior results across all
scenes in the 3D-OVS dataset. For more details about openvocabulary segmentation, please refer to Section A.3.
Time Consumption Analysis In Table 4, we reveal the
time consumption of SAGA and compare it with existing
promptable segmentation methods in radiance fields. ISRF
trains a feature field by mimicking the 2D multi-view visual
features extracted by DINO (Caron et al. 2021), thus enjoys
faster convergence speed. However, this leads to less accurate segmentation, necessitating extensive post-processing.

Figure 3: Qualitative results of SAGA across different scenes. We provide both the targets segmented via 2D point prompts and
the “segment everything” results.

Method

mIoU (%)

mAcc (%)

MVSeg (Mirzaei et al. 2023)
SA3D (Cen et al. 2023)
OmniSeg3D (Ying et al. 2024)

90.9
92.4
94.3

98.9
98.9
99.3

GauGroup (Ye et al. 2024)
SA-GS (Hu et al. 2024)
SA3D-GS (Cen et al. 2024)
SAGA (ours)

86.5
89.9
93.2
93.4

98.9
98.7
99.1
99.2

Method

bed

bench

room

sofa

lawn

mean

LERF
3D-OVS
LangSplat
N2F2
SAGA

73.5
89.5
92.5
93.8
97.4

53.2
89.3
94.2
92.6
95.4

46.6
92.8
94.1
93.5
96.8

27.0
74.0
90.0
92.1
93.5

73.7
88.2
96.1
96.3
96.6

54.8
86.8
93.4
93.9
96.0

Table 3: Results on 3D-OVS dataset (mIoU).
Table 2: Results on SPIn-NeRF dataset.

Method
SA3D (Cen et al. 2023)
SA-GS (Hu et al. 2024)

Training

Inference

-

45 s
15 s

ISRF (Goel et al. 2023)
2.5 mins
3.3 s
OmniSeg3D (Ying et al. 2024) 15˜40 mins 50˜100 ms
GARField (Kim et al. 2024)
20˜60 mins 30˜70 ms
SAGA (ours)
10˜40 mins
2˜5 ms
Table 4: Time consumption comparison.

Figure 5: Ablation study on effects of local feature smoothing (Smooth) and feature norm regularization (Feature
Norm). Outliers are primarily eliminated through local feature smoothing. Feature norm regularization helps features
of inner Gaussians align better with those of the surface.

Figure 6: Failure cases of SAGA. The targets of interest are
labeled by red border.

Figure 4: SAGA can maintain the high frequency texture details captured by 3D-GS. We reveal the inherent structure of
these details by shrinking the Gaussians by 60%.
SA3D and SA-GS employ an iterative mask refinement
pipeline, which eliminates the need for training but incurs
significant inference time consumption. Compared to methods that distill segmentation capabilities from SAM masks,
such as OmniSeg3D and GARField, SAGA demonstrates
much faster inference speed and comparable training speed.

4.3

Qualitative Results

Figure 3 shows that SAGA achieves fine-grained segmentation at various scales across different scenes. The compact Gaussian affinity features enable scene decomposition through simple clustering in the 3D-GS model. The
needle-like artifacts on the edges of segmented targets are
due to 3D-GS overfitting multi-view RGB without object
awareness. Building upon 3D-GS, which can capture highfrequency texture details, SAGA can effectively segment
thin, fine-grained structures, as shown in Figure 4. By
shrinking the 3D Gaussians, we reveal the underlying structural modeling capabilities of 3D-GS and demonstrate the
completeness of the segmentation results. Since GARField
lacks quantitative results on the NVOS and SPIn-NeRF
datasets, we provide qualitative comparisons in Section A.6
to highlight the effectiveness of SAGA’s learned features.

4.4

Ablation Study

Local Feature Smoothing (LFS) & Feature Norm Regularization (FNR) Both LFS and FNR impose constraints
on the Gaussian affinity features. We present visualization
results to illustrate their roles.
In Figure 5, when segmenting a 3D object with a cosine
similarity threshold of 0.75, without the feature smoothing,
the result shows many false positives, which reveals that outliers are primarily eliminated by the feature smoothing op-

eration. Unlike local feature smoothing, feature norm regularization primarily impacts the Gaussians within objects.
When raising the similarity score threshold to 0.95, the apple segmented by SAGA with feature norm regularization
remains intact, while the one without it quickly becomes
translucent. This phenomenon supports our assumption that
3D features are not perfectly aligned with 2D features, as
introduced in Section 3.4. Imposing feature norm regularization helps align the affinity features of 3D Gaussians by
pulling the features along a ray in the same direction.

5

Limitation

SAGA learns the affinity features from multi-view 2D masks
extracted by SAM. This makes SAGA hardly segment objects that are not appeared in these masks. As shown in Figure 6, this limitation is particularly evident when the target
of interest is small. Enhancing the generalization ability of
SAGA to unrecognized targets during the automatic extraction stage is a promising direction.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose SAGA, a 3D promptable segmentation method for 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS). SAGA
injects the segmentation capability of SAM into Gaussian
affinity features for all 3D Gaussians in a 3D-GS model, endowing them with a new property towards segmentation. To
preserve the multi-granularity segmentation ability of SAM
and the efficiency of 3D-GS, SAGA introduces a lightweight
scale-gate mechanism, which adapts the affinity features according to different 3D physical scales with minimal computation overhead. After training, SAGA can achieve real-time
fine-grained 3D segmentation. Comprehensive experiments
are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of SAGA. As
one of the first methods addressing promptable segmentation
in 3D-GS, the simplicity and effectiveness of SAGA pave
the way for future advancements in this field.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSFC 62322604, NSFC
62176159, Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology
Major Project 2021SHZDZX0102.

References
Barron, J. T.; Mildenhall, B.; Verbin, D.; Srinivasan, P. P.;
and Hedman, P. 2022. Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded AntiAliased Neural Radiance Fields. In CVPR.
Bhalgat, Y.; Laina, I.; Henriques, J. a. F.; Vedaldi, A.; and
Zisserman, A. 2023. Contrastive Lift: 3D Object Instance
Segmentation by Slow-Fast Contrastive Fusion. In NeurIPS.
Bhalgat, Y.; Laina, I.; Henriques, J. F.; Zisserman, A.; and
Vedaldi, A. 2024. N2F2: Hierarchical Scene Understanding
with Nested Neural Feature Fields. arXiv:2403.10997.
Bing, W.; Chen, L.; and Yang, B. 2023. DM-NeRF: 3D
Scene Geometry Decomposition and Manipulation from 2D
Images. In ICLR.
Boykov, Y. Y.; and Jolly, M.-P. 2001. Interactive graph cuts
for optimal boundary & region segmentation of objects in
ND images. In ICCV.
Caron, M.; Touvron, H.; Misra, I.; Jégou, H.; Mairal, J.; Bojanowski, P.; and Joulin, A. 2021. Emerging Properties in
Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. In ICCV.
Cen, J.; Fang, J.; Zhou, Z.; Yang, C.; Xie, L.; Zhang, X.;
Shen, W.; and Tian, Q. 2024. Segment Anything in 3D with
Radiance Fields. arXiv:2304.12308.
Cen, J.; Zhou, Z.; Fang, J.; Yang, C.; Shen, W.; Xie, L.;
Jiang, D.; Zhang, X.; and Tian, Q. 2023. Segment Anything
in 3D with NeRFs. In NeurIPS.
Chen, A.; Xu, Z.; Geiger, A.; Yu, J.; and Su, H. 2022a. TensoRF: Tensorial Radiance Fields. In ECCV.
Chen, X.; Tang, J.; Wan, D.; Wang, J.; and Zeng, G. 2023.
Interactive Segment Anything NeRF with Feature Imitation.
arXiv:2305.16233.
Chen, X.; Zhao, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Duan, M.; Qi, D.; and Zhao,
H. 2022b. Focalclick: Towards practical interactive image
segmentation. In CVPR.
Fan, Z.; Wang, P.; Jiang, Y.; Gong, X.; Xu, D.; and Wang, Z.
2023. NeRF-SOS: Any-View Self-supervised Object Segmentation on Complex Scenes. In ICLR.
Fang, J.; Yi, T.; Wang, X.; Xie, L.; Zhang, X.; Liu, W.;
Nießner, M.; and Tian, Q. 2022. Fast Dynamic Radiance
Fields with Time-Aware Neural Voxels. In SIGGRAPH Asia
2022 Conference Papers.
Fridovich-Keil, S.; Yu, A.; Tancik, M.; Chen, Q.; Recht, B.;
and Kanazawa, A. 2022. Plenoxels: Radiance Fields without
Neural Networks. In CVPR.
Fu, X.; Zhang, S.; Chen, T.; Lu, Y.; Zhu, L.; Zhou, X.;
Geiger, A.; and Liao, Y. 2022. Panoptic NeRF: 3D-to-2D
Label Transfer for Panoptic Urban Scene Segmentation. In
3DV.
Goel, R.; Sirikonda, D.; Saini, S.; and Narayanan, P. 2023.
Interactive segmentation of radiance fields. In CVPR.

Grady, L. 2006. Random walks for image segmentation.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
Gulshan, V.; Rother, C.; Criminisi, A.; Blake, A.; and Zisserman, A. 2010. Geodesic star convexity for interactive image
segmentation. In CVPR.
Guo, H.; Zhu, H.; Peng, S.; Wang, Y.; Shen, Y.; Hu, R.; and
Zhou, X. 2024. SAM-guided Graph Cut for 3D Instance
Segmentation. arXiv:2312.08372.
Hamilton, M.; Zhang, Z.; Hariharan, B.; Snavely, N.; and
Freeman, W. T. 2022. Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
by Distilling Feature Correspondences. In ICLR.
Hedman, P.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Mildenhall, B.; Reiser, C.;
Barron, J. T.; and Debevec, P. 2024. Baking Neural Radiance Fields for Real-Time View Synthesis. IEEE TPAMI.
Hu, X.; Wang, Y.; Fan, L.; Fan, J.; Peng, J.; Lei, Z.; Li,
Q.; and Zhang, Z. 2024. SAGD: Boundary-Enhanced Segment Anything in 3D Gaussian via Gaussian Decomposition. arXiv:2401.17857.
Kerbl, B.; Kopanas, G.; Leimkühler, T.; and Drettakis, G.
2023. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field
Rendering. ACM TOG.
Kerr, J.; Kim, C. M.; Goldberg, K.; Kanazawa, A.; and Tancik, M. 2023. Lerf: Language embedded radiance fields. In
ICCV.
Kim, C. M.; Wu, M.; Kerr, J.; Tancik, M.; Goldberg, K.;
and Kanazawa, A. 2024. GARField: Group Anything with
Radiance Fields. In CVPR.
Kirillov, A.; Mintun, E.; Ravi, N.; Mao, H.; Rolland, C.;
Gustafson, L.; Xiao, T.; Whitehead, S.; Berg, A. C.; Lo, W.Y.; et al. 2023. Segment anything. In ICCV.
Knapitsch, A.; Park, J.; Zhou, Q.-Y.; and Koltun, V. 2017.
Tanks and Temples: Benchmarking Large-Scale Scene Reconstruction. ACM TOG.
Kobayashi, S.; Matsumoto, E.; and Sitzmann, V. 2022. Decomposing NeRF for Editing via Feature Field Distillation.
In NeurIPS.
Liao, G.; Li, J.; Bao, Z.; Ye, X.; Wang, J.; Li, Q.; and Liu,
K. 2024. CLIP-GS: CLIP-Informed Gaussian Splatting for
Real-time and View-consistent 3D Semantic Understanding.
arXiv:2404.14249.
Lin, Y.; Florence, P.; Barron, J. T.; Lin, T.; Rodriguez, A.;
and Isola, P. 2022. NeRF-Supervision: Learning Dense Object Descriptors from Neural Radiance Fields. In ICRA.
Lindell, D. B.; Martel, J. N. P.; and Wetzstein, G. 2021. AutoInt: Automatic Integration for Fast Neural Volume Rendering. In CVPR.
Liu, K.; Zhan, F.; Zhang, J.; XU, M.; Yu, Y.; Saddik, A. E.;
Theobalt, C.; Xing, E.; and Lu, S. 2023a. Weakly Supervised
3D Open-vocabulary Segmentation. In NeurIPS.
Liu, Q.; Xu, Z.; Bertasius, G.; and Niethammer, M. 2023b.
Simpleclick: Interactive image segmentation with simple vision transformers. In ICCV.
Liu, S.; Zeng, Z.; Ren, T.; Li, F.; Zhang, H.; Yang, J.; Jiang,
Q.; Li, C.; Yang, J.; Su, H.; Zhu, J.; and Zhang, L. 2024a.
Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded PreTraining for Open-Set Object Detection. arXiv:2303.05499.

Liu, X.; Chen, J.; Yu, H.; Tai, Y.; and Tang, C. 2022. Unsupervised Multi-View Object Segmentation Using Radiance
Field Propagation. In NeurIPS.
Liu, Y.; Hu, B.; Huang, J.; Tai, Y.-W.; and Tang, C.-K.
2023c. Instance neural radiance field. In ICCV.
Liu, Y.; Hu, B.; Tang, C.-K.; and Tai, Y.-W. 2024b.
SANeRF-HQ: Segment Anything for NeRF in High Quality. In CVPR.
Lyu, W.; Li, X.; Kundu, A.; Tsai, Y.-H.; and Yang, M.-H.
2024. Gaga: Group Any Gaussians via 3D-aware Memory
Bank. arXiv:2404.07977.
Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Cayon, R. O.; Kalantari,
N. K.; Ramamoorthi, R.; Ng, R.; and Kar, A. 2019. Local
light field fusion: practical view synthesis with prescriptive
sampling guidelines. ACM TOG.
Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J. T.;
Ramamoorthi, R.; and Ng, R. 2020. NeRF: Representing
Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis. In
ECCV.
Mirzaei, A.; Aumentado-Armstrong, T.; Derpanis, K. G.;
Kelly, J.; Brubaker, M. A.; Gilitschenski, I.; and Levinshtein,
A. 2023. SPIn-NeRF: Multiview Segmentation and Perceptual Inpainting with Neural Radiance Fields. In CVPR.
Müller, T.; Evans, A.; Schied, C.; and Keller, A. 2022. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash
encoding. ACM TOG.
Niemeyer, M.; and Geiger, A. 2021. GIRAFFE: Representing Scenes As Compositional Generative Neural Feature
Fields. In CVPR.
Qin, M.; Li, W.; Zhou, J.; Wang, H.; and Pfister, H. 2024.
LangSplat: 3D Language Gaussian Splatting. In CVPR.
Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.;
Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.;
Krueger, G.; and Sutskever, I. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In
ICML.
Ren, Z.; Agarwala, A.; Russell, B. C.; Schwing, A. G.; and
Wang, O. 2022. Neural Volumetric Object Selection. In
CVPR.
Rother, C.; Kolmogorov, V.; and Blake, A. 2004. ”GrabCut”:
interactive foreground extraction using iterated graph cuts.
ACM TOG.
Siddiqui, Y.; Porzi, L.; Buló, S. R.; Müller, N.; Nießner, M.;
Dai, A.; and Kontschieder, P. 2023. Panoptic lifting for 3d
scene understanding with neural fields. In CVPR.
Sofiiuk, K.; Petrov, I. A.; and Konushin, A. 2022. Reviving
iterative training with mask guidance for interactive segmentation. In ICIP.
Stelzner, K.; Kersting, K.; and Kosiorek, A. R. 2021. Decomposing 3D Scenes into Objects via Unsupervised Volume Segmentation. arXiv:2104.01148.
Straub, J.; Whelan, T.; Ma, L.; Chen, Y.; Wijmans, E.;
Green, S.; Engel, J. J.; Mur-Artal, R.; Ren, C.; Verma, S.;
Clarkson, A.; Yan, M.; Budge, B.; Yan, Y.; Pan, X.; Yon,
J.; Zou, Y.; Leon, K.; Carter, N.; Briales, J.; Gillingham, T.;

Mueggler, E.; Pesqueira, L.; Savva, M.; Batra, D.; Strasdat,
H. M.; Nardi, R. D.; Goesele, M.; Lovegrove, S.; and Newcombe, R. 2019. The Replica Dataset: A Digital Replica of
Indoor Spaces. arXiv:1906.05797.
Sun, C.; Sun, M.; and Chen, H. 2022. Direct Voxel Grid
Optimization: Super-fast Convergence for Radiance Fields
Reconstruction. In CVPR.
Tschernezki, V.; Laina, I.; Larlus, D.; and Vedaldi, A.
2022. Neural Feature Fusion Fields: 3D Distillation of SelfSupervised 2D Image Representations. In 3DV.
Vora, S.; Radwan, N.; Greff, K.; Meyer, H.; Genova, K.; Sajjadi, M. S.; Pot, E.; Tagliasacchi, A.; and Duckworth, D.
2022. Nesf: Neural semantic fields for generalizable semantic segmentation of 3d scenes. TMLR.
Wizadwongsa, S.; Phongthawee, P.; Yenphraphai, J.; and
Suwajanakorn, S. 2021. NeX: Real-Time View Synthesis
With Neural Basis Expansion. In CVPR.
Xu, M.; Yin, X.; Qiu, L.; Liu, Y.; Tong, X.; and Han, X.
2023. SAMPro3D: Locating SAM Prompts in 3D for ZeroShot Scene Segmentation. arXiv:2311.17707.
Yang, Y.; Wu, X.; He, T.; Zhao, H.; and Liu, X.
2023.
SAM3D: Segment Anything in 3D Scenes.
arXiv:2306.03908.
Ye, M.; Danelljan, M.; Yu, F.; and Ke, L. 2024. Gaussian Grouping: Segment and Edit Anything in 3D Scenes.
arXiv:2312.00732.
Yin, Y.; Liu, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Cohen-Or, D.; Huang, J.; and
Chen, B. 2024. Sai3d: Segment any instance in 3d scenes.
In CVPR.
Ying, H.; Yin, Y.; Zhang, J.; Wang, F.; Yu, T.; Huang, R.; and
Fang, L. 2024. OmniSeg3D: Omniversal 3D Segmentation
via Hierarchical Contrastive Learning. In CVPR.
Yu, H.; Guibas, L. J.; and Wu, J. 2022. Unsupervised Discovery of Object Radiance Fields. In ICLR.
Zhi, S.; Laidlow, T.; Leutenegger, S.; and Davison, A. J.
2021. In-Place Scene Labelling and Understanding with Implicit Scene Representation. In ICCV.
Zou, X.; Yang, J.; Zhang, H.; Li, F.; Li, L.; Wang, J.; Wang,
L.; Gao, J.; and Lee, Y. J. 2023. Segment everything everywhere all at once. In NeurIPS.

A

Appendix

In this appendix we provide the concrete training strategy (Section A.1) of SAGA and implementation details
(Section A.2). Then, we provide details about the openvocabulary segmentation ability of SAGA and analyze its
limitation (Section A.3). We also provide an interpretability analysis about the scale gate mechanism (Section A.4) to
reveal the underlying principle of SAGA. Section A.5 evaluates the robustness and generalizability of SAGA by applying it to more kinds of radiance fields, and Section A.6
presents additional visualization results to demonstrate its
effectiveness.

A.1

Detailed Additional Training Stategy

During the contrastive-based learning, an unavoidable problem is the data imbalance. In SAGA, the data imbalance is
reflected in the following three aspects: 1) Scale-sensitivity
imbalance. The majority of pixel pairs exhibit insensitivity
to changes in scale. In other words, during a training iteration, most pixel pairs maintain their positive or negative classification regardless of scale variations. This makes the scale
gate collapse to constant output; 2) Positive-negative samples imbalance. The majority of pixel pairs shows negative
correspondence, resulting in segmentation features degradation; 3) Target-size imbalance. Large targets that occupy
more pixels in images have more effect on the optimization,
which leads to bad performance of segmenting small targets.
We use a resampling strategy to tackle the scalesensitivity imbalance and positive-negative samples imbalance. Then, we adopt a pixel-wise re-weighting strategy to
tackle the target-size imbalance.
Resampling In each iteration of training, we randomly select Ns scales and Np pixels within an image and form
Np × Np pixel pairs. Calculating the mask correspondence for these pixel pairs at every sampled scale results in a scale-conditioned correspondence matrix R ∈
{0, 1}Ns Np Np . We split the pixel pairs into three sets according to R: 1) Inconsistent set: Qin = {(p1 , p2 ) |
∃s1 , s2 , R(s1 , p1 , p2 ) ̸= R(s2 , p1 , p2 )}; 2) Consistent
positive set: Qpos = {(p1 , p2 ) | ∀s, R(s, p1 , p2 ) =
1}; 3) Consistent negative set: Qneg = {(p1 , p2 ) |
∀s, R(s, p1 , p2 ) = 0}. During the loss calculation, all
pixel pairs in Qin are involved. Then, we randomly select
|Qin |
pixel pairs in both Qpos and Qneg respectively. To
2
tackle the hard samples in training, we also add pixel pairs
in Qneg which have feature correspondences larger than 0.5
and pixel pairs in Qpos which have feature correspondence
smaller than 0.75 into loss calculation. This design not only
ensures the sensitivity of the loss to scale changing but also
keeps the balance of positive pairs and negative pairs. Let
ϕ(·) denote the sampling operation, after the resampling, we
get three sets of pixel pairs, i.e., Qin , ϕ(Qpos ), ϕ(Qneg ).
Re-weighting Considering two masks M1I , M2I in MI ,
when uniformly sampling a pair of pixels, the probability
that the pair is from M1I , M2I is proportional to the product
of the number of positive pixels of the two mask. This indicates that the optimization process is dominated by large

masks. To re-weight the loss, we first calculate the mean
P
PH,W
mask size mp = |K1p | M∈Kp i=1,j=1 M(i, j) for each
pixel, where Kp = {M | M ∈ MI , M(p) = 1}.
For a pixel pair (p1 , p2 ), the loss weight is defined as
ω(p1 , p2 ) = mp 1mp . All weights in a training iteration
1
2
are then min-max normalized to the range [1, 10] to ensure
stable training.
With the resampling, re-weighting strategies, the overall
loss function of SAGA is:
P
(p1 ,p2 )∈Qin ∪ϕ(Qpos ) ω(p1 , p2 )Lcorr (p1 , p2 )
L=
+
|Qin ∪ ϕ(Qpos )|
P
(p1 ,p2 )∈Qin ∪ϕ(Qneg ) ω(p1 , p2 )Lcorr (p1 , p2 )
+
|Qin ∪ ϕ(Qneg )|
X
1
Lnorm (p),
HW
p∈δ(I)

(13)
where δ(I) denotes the set of pixels within the image I.

A.2

Implementation Details

Across different scenes, SAGA maintains consistent hyperparameters. The feature dimension D is set to 32. The K
of KNN used in local feature smoothing is set to 16. Training of Gaussian affinity features lasts for 10,000 iterations.
In each iteration, we randomly sample eight different scales
and 1,000 pixels (10002 pixel pairs) from the view for training. For different loss terms, we do not adjust any loss balance coefficients in experiments.
We extract the multi-view 2D masks with the SAM ViT-H
model. For open-vocabulary segmentation, we use the OpenCLIP ViT-B/16 model. All training and inference is conducted on a single Nvidia RTX 3090 GPU.
Experiment Setting For the NVOS dataset, we randomly
select positive and negative points from the scribbles on the
reference view (provided by the NVOS dataset) to conduct
promptable 3D segmentation. We then render the 3D segmentation result on the target view and evaluate the Intersection over Union (IoU) and pixel-wise accuracy against
the provided ground truth. For each scene in the SPIn-NeRF
dataset, we randomly select a subset of points within and
outside the mask of the reference view as positive and negative prompts.

A.3

Vote-based Open-vocabulary Segmentation

To enable open-vocabulary 3D segmentation in radiance
fields, previous studies (Kerr et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023a;
Qin et al. 2024; Bhalgat et al. 2024; Liao et al. 2024) focus on aligning 3D language feature fields with the visual
features extracted by CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) image encoder. Then 3D segmentation can be achieved by querying
the language fields with the textual features. The process of
training language feature field can be regarded as multi-view
feature fusing, which, in essence, is a kind of vote mechanism. This motivate us to see whether SAGA can handle
open-vocabulary segmentation with well-trained Gaussian
affinity features at minimum modification.

Figure A1: Adapting the scale gate mechanism with GARField achieves competitive results, demonstrating the potential of
SAGA across different radiance fields.
Readers may wonder why we do not use grounding methods like Grounding-DINO (Liu et al. 2024a) to locate the object and convert the location into point prompts, which can
then be fed to SAGA. To answer this question, we emphasize the setting of open-vocabulary segmentation. We follow
a stricter approach than previous studies, such as SA3D (Cen
et al. 2023) and GaussianGrouping (Ye et al. 2024), which
rely on Grounded-SAM to convert language prompts to visual prompts in a specific view. Specifying this view introduces additional prior knowledge. In SAGA, users do not
need to query a specific view; all that is required for openvocabulary segmentation is a text prompt. With this idea in
mind, we introduce a vote-based open-vocabulary segmentation strategy.
Constructing Vote Graph by Clustering To cluster the
multi-view masks, an intuitive way is to cluster their corresponding segmentation features. However, this is infeasible since the segmentation features in SAGA are scaleconditioned. Segmentation features for different masks are
probably in different feature subspace. This drives us to find
a kind of global features that is consistent across different
scales for multi-view masks to enable global clustering.
We propose to use the segmented Gaussians as the global
feature. First, we uniformly sample a set of anchor Gaussians A from G. Then, for a 2D mask M ∈ MI with scale
sM , we calculate its scale-conditioned feature as3 :
fM =

1
δ(M)

X

FsM (p).

(14)

p∈δ(M)

Then we compute the similarities between fM and all anchor Gaussians in A to get a segmentation result AM = {g |
⟨fgsM , fM ⟩ > τ, g ∈ A}. The distance between two masks
M1 , M2 is defined as their intersection over union of this
|AM1 ∩AM2 |
3D segmentation result, i.e., D(M1 , M2 ) = |AM
∪AM2 | .
1
Then we perform HDBSCAN based on this distance map to
cluster the 2D masks.
Vote-based Segmentation After clustering, we obtain a
vote graph V, where masks of the same 3D target (instance
or part) are grouped together. In other words, each cluster
centroid in V represents a potential segmentation target in
the 3D space.
For each 2D mask MI of image I, we extract its visual
feature by feeding the masked image I ⊙ MI to the CLIP
3
For brevity, we continue to use δ(·) to denote the set of positive
pixels in 2D masks.

visual encoder. During inference, given any text prompt, a
relevancy score rM is assigned to each mask M by comparing the textual feature with the visual feature of the mask4 .
For a cluster centroid T in V, the relevancy scores of its
corresponding 2D masks are aggregated to form its final relevancy score, i.e.,
rT =

1 X
rM ,
|VT |

(15)

M∈VT

where VT is the set containing all 2D masks corresponding to the cluster centroid T. For semantic segmentation in
the 3D-OVS dataset, which provides a category list for each
scene, the label of each cluster is assigned as the category
with the highest relevancy score.
Limitation of SAGA in Open-vocabulary Segmentation
The vote-based open-vocabulary segmentation strategy encounters difficulties in certain scenarios. For instance, when
considering a bowl of noodles with an egg in it, SAGA ideally should distinguish between categories such as the egg,
the egg with noodles (contents of the bowl), and the bowl
with noodles and egg. However, because ”egg” is included
in masks at larger scales, CLIP often misclassifies larger objects as ”egg.” This issue is inherently rooted in the multigranularity ambiguity in semantics. Addressing this problem
is a promising research direction.
Another limitation is common among current CLIP-SAM
based methods, such as LangSplat (Qin et al. 2024) and
N2F2 (Bhalgat et al. 2024). Both SAGA and these methods
first use SAM to segment the images and then use CLIP to
attach semantics to these segments by segmenting the corresponding regions of the image and feeding them to CLIP.
However, the effectiveness of the CLIP visual encoder also
depends on context. For example, SAM sometimes segments
the texture on a wall. Without seeing the entire wall, CLIP
struggles to recognize it. This lack of context hinders the
ability to ground the segments accurately. This is an important yet currently unexplored issue.

A.4

Interpretability Analysis

To better understand the scale gate mechanism, we analyze
the weights of the learned scale gates through a statistical
analysis across 47 scenes, each containing 32 scale gates,
resulting in a total of 47 × 32 entries. Within these entries,
36.1% (543) of the gates are positive, while 63.9% (961) are
4
We adopt the relevancy score introduced in LERF (Kerr et al.
2023), which has been proven robust.

negative, meaning that a typical scene has about 12 positive
gates and 20 negative gates. In other words, when largerscale features are used as input, more gates tend to close,
and fewer gates remain open, which aligns with the intuitive
understanding that finer-grained segmentation requires more
features to effectively capture detailed information.

A.5

SAGA with Hybrid Radiance Fields

Although SAGA is designed for segmentation in 3D-GS, its
scale gate mechanism is not confined to a particular type of
radiance field. We demonstrate this versatility by adapting
SAGA to GARField, replacing the scale-conditioned affinity field with a scale-gated affinity field. As illustrated in Figure A1, the performance remains competitive.
Furthermore, we apply SAGA to InstantNGP (Müller
et al. 2022), which can be viewed as an explicit version of
GARField without the MLP. As shown in Figure A2, SAGA
continues to produce competitive results. It is worth noting
that direct clustering on the hash grid of InstantNGP is infeasible. To address this, we follow GARField’s approach,
using 3D-GS to query the hash grids and extract 3D features
for clustering.

A.6

More Qualitative Results

We present additional qualitative results in Figures A5 and
A4. In Figure A3, it is evident that the affinity features in
SAGA exhibit better stability compared to GARField. We
perform clustering on the affinity features across the entire
scene. At a smaller scale (0.01), both SAGA and GARField
achieve fine-grained segmentation. However, when conducting coarse segmentation at a larger scale, GARField tends to
merge smaller objects into larger ones (e.g., the table). This
behavior can be attributed to two factors: first, GARField
assumes that the entire scene belongs to the same “object”
when the scale exceeds that of any existing objects within
the scene. Second, GARField employs an implicit feature
field to fit the scale-conditioned affinity features. As noted
by Mildenhall et al. (2020), radiance fields often produce
over-smoothed predictions, which can result in the loss of
small objects at larger scales. In contrast, SAGA assigns an
explicit affinity feature to each 3D Gaussian in the 3D-GS
model and uses a simple one-layer linear layer (i.e., the scale
gate) to model the scale-conditioned effect. This approach
allows SAGA to better preserve smaller objects. This is also
evidenced by Figure A1: by replacing the multi-layer perceptron of GARField with our proposed scale-gate mechanism, GARField can preserve the small objects on the table.

Figure A2: Applying SAGA to Instant-NGP achieves competitive segmentation performance, further demonstrating the generalizability and robustness of SAGA across different radiance field representations.

Figure A3: Qualitative comparison with GARField. We conduct feature clustering across the whole scene (LERF-figurines).
Compared to GARField, which employs an additional feature field to model affinity features, SAGA demonstrates greater
stability by utilizing explicit affinity features. At larger scales, SAGA effectively preserves the perception of small objects
without merging them with other targets.

Figure A4: More qualitative results of SAGA.

Figure A5: More qualitative results of SAGA.

